---

### Page 1

## 1.3 Nomenclature
Chemistry 30: Unit 1 Review of Basic Principles

### Classification of Compounds

Compounds are classified based on the types of atoms that compose them. The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has developed systematic naming conventions for each group of compounds.

#### Main Categories of Compounds

| Type      | Description                                                      | Examples                        |
|-----------|------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Covalent  | Contain only nonmetal atoms                                      | $CO_2$, $H_2O$, $C_2H_6$         |
| Ionic     | Contain a metal and a nonmetal, or contain the $NH_4^+$ ion      | $NaCl$, $K_2SO_4$, $(NH_4)_2CO_3$|

#### Subcategories of Compounds

* **Binary compounds:** Two different elements (e.g., $NaCl$, $CO_2$)
* **Hydrocarbons:** Compounds containing only hydrogen and carbon (e.g., $C_2H_6$)
* **Acids:** Compounds with hydrogen and a nonmetal or polyatomic ion (e.g., $HCl$, $H_2SO_4$)
* **Ammonium compounds:** Contain $NH_4^+$ as the cation (e.g., $(NH_4)_2SO_4$)
* **Monovalent ionic:** Metal ions with only one possible charge (e.g., $Na^+$, $K^+$)
* **Divalent ionic:** Metal ions with two possible charges (e.g., $Fe^{2+}$, $Fe^{3+}$)

> **Example:**
> - $MnBr_2$ is an ionic compound with a divalent metal cation (Mn can have more than one charge).

### Assignment #1: Compound Classification

Determine the correct group for each of the following compounds:

| Formula        | Group (Classification)         |
|---------------|-------------------------------|
| $C_3H_6$      | Hydrocarbon (Covalent)         |
| $(NH_4)_2SO_4$| Ammonium Compound (Ionic)      |
| $K_3PO_4$     | Ionic Compound                 |
| $FeO$         | Divalent Ionic Compound        |
| $N_2O_5$      | Covalent Compound              |
| $HClO_4$      | Acid                           |
| $Ba(NO_3)_2$  | Ionic Compound                 |

---

### Page 2

## 1.3 Nomenclature
Chemistry 30: Unit 1 Review of Basic Principles
Naming Covalent Compounds
Covalent compounds contain nonmetal atoms combining with other nonmetal atoms. They can be
classified into three groups based on the nonmetal atoms present. They are:
i) Binary Molecular Compounds
Binary molecular compounds contain only two nonmetals.
To Name:
The first atom is named in full
. The second atoms name is shortened and -ide added.
The prefixes below are added to the first and second name to indicate the number of atoms
present in the compounds.
The prefix mono is not placed on the first atom's name.
# of Atoms Prefix # of Atoms
Prefix
1
mono-
6
hexa-
2
di-
7
hepta-
3
tri-
8
oct-
4
tetra-
9
non-
5
penta-
10
dec-
Examples:
P205 = diphosphorus pentaoxide or diphosphorous pentoxide (either considered acceptable)
$CO_2 = carbon dioxide$
ii) Hydrocarbonststragnt chained)
Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen.
To Name:
The first part of the name is a prefix that indicates the number of carbon atoms. The prefixes
are the same as those used by Binary Molecular compounds above except for the first four.
These four are:
# of Carbon
Prefixes
Atoms
1
meth -
2
eth -
3
prop -
4
but -
The second part of the name: is a suffix that describes if the compound contains single bonds, a
double or a triple bond between the carbon atoms. The following table illustrates the naming
and gives examples.
Group Bonds between carbons Suffix Ratio of Carbon to Hydrogen Example Name
Alkane
all single
ane
CH2n+2
CgHs propane
Alkene
one double
ene
CH2n
C4Hs butene
Alkyne
one triple
yne
CnH2n-2
C5Hs pentyne
2


---

### Page 3

## 1.3 Nomenclature
Chemistry 30: Unit 1 Review of Basic Principles
iii) Acids
Acids are substances formed when nonmetal ions combine with hydrogen. The hydrogen is written
first in the compound and the naming is based on whether the anion (negative ion) is:
a simple (ion is mono)
e polyatomic. (ion is compound)
To Name Acids with Simple Anions: (Binary Acids)
The first part of the name is the prefix hydro.
This is followed by a the name of the simple anion, which is shortened and - ic added
o for example chlorine (CI-) would become chloric
The last part of the name is the word acid
Acid
Ion
Name
$HF$
F-
Hydrofluoric Acid
$HI$
I
Hydroiodic Acid
To Name Acids with polyatomic anions: (Ocyacids or Tertiary Acids)
The first part of the name is the name of the anion which is shortened. One of two suffixes
added to this name.
o - ic if the anion name ends in = ate (more oxygen).
o ous if the anion name ends in = ite (less oxygen).
The last part of the name is acid
Acid
Ion
Name
sulfuric acid
$H_2S_04$
SO42-
(anion, sulfate)
perchlorous acid
$HCIO_3$
CIO3-
(anion, perchlorite)
To determine an acid formula from a name we:
1. Determine the anion present from the name.
2. Since the compound is an acid the cation (positive ion ) is H +
3. Write down the formulas of the two ions. Make the value of the charge on the negative
ion the subscript on the hydrogen ion
Example:
Sulfuric Acid
sulfuric
> sulfate
> SO42-
acid
> hydrogen
> H +1
Formula
> H2SO4
3


---

### Page 4

## 1.3 Nomenclature
Chemistry 30: Unit 1 Review of Basic Principles
Naming ionic compounds
Ionic Compounds contain a metal or the ion NH4 +1. All ionic compounds are named by listing the
names of the two ions that are present. The cation always comes first.
Formulas for ionic compounds are termed empirical. This means that the ions are always listed in
the simplest ratio.
In any ionic compound: the total charge on the cation is equal and opposite to the
total charge on the anion. Overall, the compound is neutral.
This concept is llustrated in the table below
Number of ions
Formula
Ions charge
Total charge
present
Ca3(PO4)2
Ca 2+
3
+ 6
PO43-
2
-6 6
All ionic compounds contain a cation (ion with positive charge) and an anion (ion with
negative charge)
Ions (both anions and cations) can be either simple (one atom ions) or complex (polyatomic
ions).
The ionic compounds can be broken into three groups, in order to name them.
i) Ammonium (NH4 +) compounds
Ammonium compounds contain the complex cation NH4 +1.
To Name: (using a table of common ions)
The first part of the name is Ammonium
Second part of name is the name of the anion.
Formula
Name
(NH4)2S04
Ammonium sulfate
(NH4)3PO4
Ammonium phosphate
To determine formula from name
Using a table of common ions determine the two ions that are present, the positive ion is NH4+
and then the anion.
The subscript for the NH4 +1 ion in the formula will be the charge on the anion and the
subscript for the anion will be one.
For example: Ammonium carbonate
Ions present
NH4 +1
CO3 2-
Cross over charges
to determine
(NH4)2CO3
formula
4


---

### Page 5

## 1.3 Nomenclature
Chemistry 30: Unit 1 Review of Basic Principles
ii) Monovalent Cations
Ionic compounds containing monovalent cations (cation with one charge) are named by simply listing
the name of the cation and the name of the anion.
To Name (using a table of common ions):
Locate the name of the metal cation (positive ion). Make sure it has only one charge.
Locate the name of the anion.
Place names together.
Formula
Name
$AgCl$
Silver chloride
Mg(NO3)2
Magnesium nitrate
To determine the formula from name: (using a table of common ions)
locate the cation and anion in a table of common ions and write down the formula for each.
Make the value of the charge for the cation the subscript for the anion and visa versa (cross
over value of charges = cross-over method)
simplify the formula to the simplest ratio of the ions. See table below
ift there is more than one complex ion needed in the formula then a bracket is placed around
the ions and subscript used to indicate the number of ions needed.
Name
Ions charge
Formula Empirical
Mg 2+
Magnesium Oxide
Mg,02
$MgO$
2-
Divalent Cations
Ionic compounds containing divalent cations (metal ions with two possible ionic charges) can be
named in two ways
1. Using the Stock system (Roman Numerals )
2. Using the Classical system (suffix - ic and - ous.)
A. Stock system:
o developed by Alfred Stock. . This method places a Roman Numerals in brackets behind
the name of the cation.
o The Roman Numerals is equal in value to the charge on the cation.
Cation
Name
Sn 4+
Tin (IV)
Cu+
Copper (I)
5


---

### Page 6

## 1.3 Nomenclature
Chemistry 30: Unit 1 Review of Basic Principles
To Name using Stock system given the formula:
o Locate the name of the anion and cation in a table of ions.
o Using the concept that the total charge of the anion and cation must be equal we can
determine what the charge on the cation must be (anion charges are always fixed). See
example below
Total
Charge on
Total charge Number of Charge on Each
Formula
Anion
charge on on Cation
Cation
Cation
anion
Fe203
2-
- 6
+6
2
+3
The name of the example above would be: Iron (III) oxide
To determine name then we: (using a table of common ions)
1. Name the cation
2. Determine the charge on the cation using the method above.
3. Apply the correct Roman Numerals
4. Finally name of the anion.
Total
Total
Formula
Name of Charge on charge on Charge on
Name
Cation
Cation
Anion
Cation
Cu20
Copper
-2
+2
+1
Copper (I) oxide
Chromium (III)
$CrCl_3$
Chromium
-3
+3
+3
chloride
To determine formula from name. See monovalent cations (on previous page)
6


---

### Page 7

## 1.3 Nomenclature
Chemistry 30: Unit 1 Review of Basic Principles
## 1.3 Assignment: Nomenclature of Compounds
Complete the table:
Formula
Group
Name
$HCIO$
Covalent; Acid
Hypochlorous Acid
Formula
Group
Name
C,H6
Copper(II) Oxide
H;PO4
Potassium Carbonate
$C_6H_10$
Pentene
Cl0
Hydroflouric Acid
Co (SO4)
Tin(IV) Sulfide
$XeF_6$
Arsenic trifluoride
$HI$
Gold(III) Chloride
$NaOH$
7