

---

### Page 1

## 2.1 Atomic Structure
Review of Terminology
The following is a list of words and terms that you should be familiar with. Use your
textbook or other resources to help define these terms using words and a diagram or an
example:
Term
Definition
Diagram/ Example
1. atom
2. nucleus
3. electron
4. proton
5. ion
6. energy
level
(electron
shell)
7. valence
electron
1


---

### Page 2

## 2.1 Atomic Structure
Components ofan Atom
The modern atom as viewed by scientists today consists of three main particles located in two regions.
1. The nucleus or central core of the atom
is composed of positively charged protons
and neutrons with a neutral charge.
proton +
It is believed that the neutrons are needed to
hold the positively charged protons together in
the nucleus.
The force that holds these particles together is
termed the nuclear binding force and it is
believed to be one of the strongest forces that
nucleus
neutron
exists in nature.
The nucleus takes up a very small portion of the atom.
2. Electron cloud is the second region and surrounds the nucleus.
The cloud holds the third particle, which is a negatively quantum numbern
charged electron.
n 4
Electrons circle the nucleus in the electron cloud; we never
n3
n-2
know both the location and speed of an electron
$n=1$
(Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle)
K
However, we do know the electrons are arranged in energy
electronic
orbits
levels about the nucleus.
The electrons in their lowest energy state (termed ground
state) occupy these energy levels from lowest (closest to nucleus) to highest energy.
Only certain numbers of electrons can be placed in each energy level; thus, we can take an
estimated guess as to the location of a specific electron in general.
Ions: The number of electrons in a neutral atom (no charge) is equal to the number of protons
(atomic #). Atoms may either gain or lose electrons during chemical interactions with other atoms. If
they gain electrons they become negatively charged, if they lose electrons they become positively
charged. We term these charged atoms ions.
For Example: If Magnesium loses two electrons it would have 12 + charged protons and only 10 -
charged electrons and would become a +2 ion. If Chlorine gains one electron it would have 35 protons
(+) and 36 electrons (-) and become a - 1 ion. The charge on the ion indicates the number of electrons
gained or lost.
2


---

### Page 3

## 2.1 Atomic Structure
Electron Dot Diagrams:
The octet rule states that atoms are most stable when they have a full shell of electrons in the
outside electron ring (or energy level).
O The first shell has only two electrons in a single subshell. Helium has a full shell, SO it is
stable, an inert element. Hydrogen, though, has only one electron. It can lose an electron
to become H+, a hydrogen ion or it can gain an electron to become H-, a hydride ion.
O All the other shells have 2 subshells, giving them at least eight electrons on the outside.
These subshells often are the only valence electrons, thus the octet rule is named for the
eight electrons found here.
O The Transition Elements, Lanthanides, and Actinides are all metals. Many of them have
varying valences because they can trade around electrons from the outer shell to the
inner subshells (these elements can have up to 4 subshells in energy levels 4-6) that are
not filled. For this reason they sometimes appear to violate the octet rule.
Valence electrons are the electrons in the outermost shell ofthe atom. These are
the electrons most likely to interact when chemical reactions occur and are therefore of
great interest to chemists. (refer to periodic table)
Electron. Arrangement and the Periodic Table
The columns in the periodic table represent the number of valence electrons an atom
has to work with. The table below illustrates these numbers. We can use these number to draw
Lewis Dot Diagrams predict an atoms chemical behavior.
Valence
## 1 2
## 3 4 5 6 7 8
Variable Valence
For example, Magnesium
For example, Polonium
3


---

### Page 4

## 2.1 ATOMIC STRUCTURE
## 2.1 Assignment
1. Chemical bonds are formed when atoms share, donate or accept electrons. In your own
words, explain how Dalton's, Thomson's and Rutherford's models do not allow for chemical
bonding.
2. The Bohr model is useful for representing electron shells, however, this model has been
replaced by the Quantum Mechanical Model. Explain how this is more accurate
representation of the atom.
3. Use the characteristics of the atoms described above, and the examples given below to
complete the following chart.
Atom
Closet Noble Gas
Most Common Ion
a. Sodium
Neon
Na+
b. Chlorine
C. Silicon
d. Aluminum
e. Oxygen
4


---

### Page 5

## 2.1 ATOMIC STRUCTURE
4. Draw the Lewis Dot Diagrams for the atoms below:
O Aluminum
O Calcium
O Sulfur
O Silicon
O Neon
O Bromine
5. Draw the Lewis Dot Diagrams for the ions below:
O Al3+
O Cl-
o S2-
5


---

### Page 6

## 2.1 ATOMIC STRUCTURE
6. CHALLENGE! Draw the Lewis Structure for the following compounds. Hint: to begin,
determine if the compound is ionic or covalent.
O Sodium Chloride
o Potassium Oxide
O Silicon dioxide
O Oxygen gas
O Aluminum chloride
O Boron Tribromide
6