

---

### Page 1

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 1
Chemistry 30
Chemical Bonding
For additional help, check out pages 328-438 in Heath Chemistry
& TYPES OF CHEMICAL BONDS :
FalIoc
Fs2.Cev.ct
Fes.Mctas
OCOK(CPWwrGOL
Wirdoucom
1
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 2

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 2
Chemical Bonding ANSWER KEY
## Ionic Bonds
1. Define the following terms:
a) ionic bond - a type of bond between a metal and a non-metal that involves the transfer of electrons to create
ions
b) crystal - a structure with regular repeating patterns
Reviewing Lewis Dot Diagrams for Ions
Write the Lewis Dot Diagrams for the following:
beryllium atom:
beryllium ion:
Bel
Be2+
phosphorus atom:
phosphide ion:
3-
P:
P
oxygen atom:
oxide ion:
2-
0
## Drawing Ionic Bonds
1. sodium nitride
No Na; Na;
3Na
N:
- NoN
2
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 3

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 3
2. barium oxide
Ba
X a
Baj
$OA$
b00
3. calcium chloride
.is
Co
$CI$
A
V
G-2:CI)
V
Cocia
4. potassium fluoride
F: 1 KJ
. -
od
V
$KF$
5. sodium oxide
x
Na'
## 04 2Na' :8
No
$AX$
- Noo
xX
x
6. aluminum chloride
Al
*CIA Cis
* X
K x
$XA$
$AlBt$
3C13
*
$AICI$
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 4

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 4
## Introduction to Covalent Bonds
1. Define the following terms:
a) covalent bond - a bond formed between two non-metals in which electrons are shared
b) molecule - a particle that contains two or more atoms that is electrically neutral
C) intramolecular force- forces inside the molecule that hold the molecule together (ie. Covalent bond)
intermolecular force- forces between molecules that hold one molecule to another
2. Define the following terms:
a) single covalent - 2 electrons are shared in a covalent bond
b) double covalent - 4 electrons are shared in a covalent bond
c) triple covalent = 6 electrons are shared in a covalent bond
3. What type of bonding exists in network solids?
*Covalent bonding exists in network solids within molecules and between molecules.
4. List two ways in which a network covalent solid is similar to an ionic compound.
1. There are forces between molecules holding them together
2. They form a crystalline pattern
## Drawing Covalent Bonds
1. Chlorine and chlorine
$CI$
CI() CI: or CI CI
x
xx
4
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 5

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 5
2.
Hydrogen and oxygen forming water (H20)
H
H
H)
1
2H
+
O
H
3.
Hydrogen and fluorine (HF)
H
H
5
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 6

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 6
## Drawing Single Covalent Bonds
Work
Final Answer
Ex: nitrogen triiodide (NI3)
N(5) + I (7x3) = 26ve
I-N-I:
::
1. carbon tetrabromide (CBr4)
:
Br:
-
-
d
:Br
C
Br:
:
-
-
Br:
:
2. dihydrogen monoxide (H20)
O
H
H
3. dihydrogen monoselenide
H-Se-H
4. phosphorus pentachloride
:CI:
CI-P-C:
/
CI.
ci
5. Bromine gas
: . Br-Br:
6
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 7

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 7
## Double AND Triple Covalent Bonds
Double bonds can form when a shared single bond alone doesn't satisfy either atoms valence. Double bonds
are TWO SHARED PAIRS of electrons for a total of 4 electrons (2 electrons from one atom and 2 from the
other). Double bonds are much stronger and bond the atoms closer than a single bond.
Work
Final Answer
Ex: carbon dioxide
$C(4) + O(6x_2) = 16ve$
)
-
1. Oxygen gas
$0=0.$
2. Ethene (C,H4)
H
** C's are always central and they will
H
link together.
H
H
Triple bonds can form when 3 pairs of electrons are shared for a total of 6 shared electrons. Typically, one
atom donates 3 electrons and the other atom donates the other 3. Triple bonds are even stronger than double
bonds and the atoms are held even closer together.
Work
Final Answer
Ex: Nitrogen gas
$N(5x_2) = 10ve$
NEN:
1. Ethyne (C,H2)
** C'sare always central and they will
H-CEC-H
link together.
2. hydrogen cyanide (HCN)
H--CEN
7
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 8

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 8
A mixture of all types of bonds: Draw the bonding diagrams (using arrows for ionic and Lewis Structures
for covalent).
Work
Final Answer
1. N2H2
$H-N=N-H$
2. C,H6
H H
-
H C
C H
-
H
3. CF2Cl
F
4. LiF
+
F.
Li
F
Li e
5. N2F4
F-N-N-E
-
F:
H
6. Mg3N2
Magnesium Nitride
a
:
Mg .
+
N:
o
Mg 0
-
N:
o
Mg 0.
o
N:
Mg O
Magnesium loses 2electrons, and
Nitrogen gains 36 electronst tol have an Octet.
+2
-3
$Mg N: =$
2
Mg,N2
C.Ophardt, c. 2003
8
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 9

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 9
Polyatomic Ions
Now you are going to draw electron dot diagrams for the following polyatomic ions. Remember that even
though they are ions, the atoms are held together inside the ion with covalent bonds. Negative ions have gained
electrons, you must include these in the structure. Positive ions have lost electrons, you must delete these from
the structure.
Work
Final Answer
Ex. hydroxide ion [OH]
$H(1) + O(6) +1 = 8ve$
H-O:
1. ammonium ion [NH4]+1
H
- -
- -N- - H
H
2. phosphite ion [PO3]3
3-
-
Q-P-0:
I
O:
3. sulfite ion
2-
O
9
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 10

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 10
Polarity and Electronegativity
1. Define the following terms:
a. polar covalent-covalent bond with unequal sharing of electrons
b. nonpolar covalent- covalent bond with equal sharing of electrons
1. Sodium chloride (NaCI) is an example of an ionic bond. What is the difference in electronegativity
between sodium and chlorine? A: 2.1
2. Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is an example of a covalent bond. What is the difference in electronegativity
between nitrogen and oxygen? A: 0.5
3. Use the table and chart from this worksheet to label the following bond types as nonpolar, polar or ionic:
a. NH3
## 0.9 difference; therefore, polar covalent
b. MgO
f. Nacl
## 2.3 difference; therefore, ionic
## 2.1 difference; therefore, ionic
C. Cl2
## 0 difference; therefore, nonpolar covalent
$CH_4$
g.
d. HCI
## 0.4 difference; therefore, non-polar covalent
## 0.9 difference; therefore, polar covalent
e.H20
h. NO2
## 1.4 difference; therefore, polar covalent
## 0.5 difference; therefore, polar covalent
## Metallic Bonds
1. What is a metallic bond? Explain how the ions and electrons are arranged.
A metallic bond is formed between multiple metal atoms with electrons being delocalized between all of the atoms
involved.
2. What is an alloy?
An alloy is a mixture of metals that contains metallic bonds.
10
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 11

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 11
3. Identify the following compounds as metallic, ionic or covalent:
a. RbCl-ionic
e. Mg3N2 -ionic
b. Cla-covalent
f. Pt -metallic
C. Au -metallic
g. Al - metallic
d. B:O,l'-covalent
h. Ag -metallic
Intermolecular (van der Waals) Forces
1. List the van der Waals forces in order of increasing strength.
H bonding > Dipole-Dipole >London Dispersion Forces
2. Explain instantaneous dipoles and how this results in a weak intermolecular force.
Electrons are shared unevenly in a nonpolar bond (momentarily), which causes an unequal distribution in a
neighboring molecule. causing a brief attraction between the normally non-polar bonds.
Use your electronegativity table and the chart above to answer the following questions:
1. Determine the INTRAmolecular force for the following compounds: (nonpolar covalent, polar covalent,
ionic)
CH4 = nonpolar covalent
$CF_4= polar covalent$
HI = nonpolar covalent
$CO_2 = polar covalent$
$NH_3= polar covalent$
$NaCl = ionic$
2. Determine the INTERmolecular force for the compounds above: (London forces, dipole-dipole, H bonding,
ionic)
$CH_4 = London forces$
$CF_4= dipole-dipole$
$HI = London forces$
$CO_2 = dipole-dipole$
$NH_3= H bonding$
$NaCl = ionic$
11
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 12

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 12
## 2.2 Assignment
Bonding Vocabulary Review Sheet
Give the type of bond or force described by the following:
Your choices can be (and you will use some them more than once):
Covalent
Metallic Bond
Network Solid
Ionic bond
Van der Waals
Ionic bond
1.
This bonding is found between cations and anions.
Covalent Bond
2. This is found between atoms of nonmetals.
Metallic Bond
3. This is found between atoms of metals.
Network Solid
4.
This is the force that holds quartz together.
Van der Waals
5
This is a term to describe all intermolecular forces.
Metallic Bond
6. This is the force that produces electrical conductivity in the solid state.
Ionic bond
7.
This is the force that produces an electrical insulator in the solid state
but an electrical conductor in the liquid state.
Ionic bond
8.
This is the force that holds crystals of table salt together.
Network Solid
9. This is the force that holds a diamond together.
Your choices can be (and you will use some them more than once):
Polar Covalent
Hydrogen Bond
London Force
Nonpolar Covalent
Dipole-Dipole Force
Ionic Bond
Dipole-Dipole Force 10. This is the term to describe the attraction between one polar molecule
and another polar molecule.
London Force
11. This is the term to describe the attraction between one nonpolar
molecule and another nonpolar molecule.
Nonpolar Covalent 12. This is the force inside ai molecule of bromine (holds the molecule together).
London Force
13. This is the force between two molecules of bromine (holds molecules together).
Nonpolar Covalent 14. This is the force inside a molecule of methane CH4.
London Force
15. This is the force between two molecules of methane CH4.
Ionic
16. This is the force that holds cesium fluoride together.
Polar Covalent
17. This is the force that holds the carbon to the oxygen in carbon dioxide.
Polar Covalent
18. This is the force inside a water molecule (H,0)
Hydrogen Bond
19. This is the force between water molecules.
Nonpolar Covalent 20. This is the force inside a molecule of nitrogen (N2).
12
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 13

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 13
London Force
21. This is the force between two molecules of nitrogen.
22. Explaining the Properties of Ionic Compounds
Using what you know about ionic bonds and crystal structure, complete the following sentence stems.
Ex. Ionic compounds have relatively high melting and boiling points because.. their ions are held together by strong
forces (ionic bonds).
1. Ionic compounds are hard because : they have strong intramolecular bonds.
2. A piece ofs sodium chloride is easily cracked or fractured because.. the crystal lattice structure becomes offset
when the crystal is hit; this can cause positive ions to be next to each other which would create a repulsive force
between like charges-breaking the lattice.
3. Ionic compounds are electrolytes because. the compound dissociates in water and ions (electrons) are able to
move freely and can therefore carry an electric charge through the water.
23. Explaining the Properties of Covalent Compounds
Using what you know about covalent bonds, complete the following sentence stems.
Ex. Covalent compounds are usually liquids or gases at room temperature because. there is little attraction between
molecules (London dispersion forces)
1. Covalent compounds are share electrons because they are made up of non-metals that like to keep their
electrons to fill their outer shell (octet rule).
2. Aj piece of paraffin wax is easily malleable because.. there are weak intermolecular forces between the molecules
(London Dispersion).
3. Covalent compounds are weak electrolytes because.. they don't dissociate in water and the electrons cannot move
freely to carry the electric charge.
24. Explaining the Properties of Metallic
Using what you know about metallic bonds, complete the following sentence stems.
Ex. Metallic compounds are malleable and ductile because. metal crystal structures are flexible (layers within the crystal
lattice can slide across one another).
1. Metallic compounds conduct electricity because delocalized electrons are mobile within the solid.
2. Metallic compounds are insoluble because. this would mean electrons have to be localized to one atom in order
to separate the atoms; this is very hard to do and therefore, metals are insoluble.
3. Metallic compounds are usually solid at room temperature because metallic bonds are very strong.
13
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 14

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 14
25. Bonding Multiple Choice Review Sheet
For questions 1-30 the choices are:
(1) ionic
(2) polar covalent
(3) nonpolar covalent (4) metallic (5) van der Waals forces
*** If you use this, be specific on
1.
The bonding found in calcium chloride is : 1
WHICH van der Waals force.
2.
The bonding found in silver is 4
3.
The bonding found inside a molecule of carbon tetrachloride is 2
4.
The bonding that holds water molecules together to make ice is 5 (H-bonding)
5.
The bonding found in a high melting point crystalline solid that conducts electricity when liquid...1
6.
The bonding found between atoms in carbon disulfide is 3
7.
The bonding found in a molecule of ammonia (NH3) is .2
8.
The intramolecular force in iodine (I2) is .3
9.
The: intermolecular force in iodine is 5 (London Dispersion)
10. The bonding found is sodium fluoride is . 1
13. The bonding that produces electrical conductivity in the solid state is .4
14. The bonding found in a network solid is either or 2or3
15. The bonding found in any alloy is ..4
16. The bonding that results from the complete transfer of electrons is 1
17. The bonding that is an equal sharing of valence electrons is .3
18. The bonding between elements with an electronegativity difference of 1.75 is 1
19. The bonding within a sulfate ion is 2
20. The bonding between sodium and sulfate in sodium sulfate is 1
21. The bonding within hydrocarbon molecules (made ofhydrogen and carbon) is 3
22. The bonding between hydrocarbon molecules is ...5 (London Dispersion)
23. The bonding that depends upon a loose cloud of valence electrons or an "electron glue" is 4
24. The bonding that creates dipoles is 2
14
Updated 2/16/2017


---

### Page 15

## 2.2 Chemical Bonding
Page 15
For questions 25-35 the choices are:
(1) single covalent (2) double covalent (3) triple covalent (4) hydrogen bonding (5) London forces
25. The bonding that results from the formation of "instantaneous dipoles" is .5
26. The intramolecular forces in liquid nitrogen (N2) are 3
27. The intermolecular forces in liquid nitrogen are 5
28. Acetylene (C,Hz) has the carbons bonded to each other and one hydrogen bonded to each carbon. The
bonding between the carbon atoms is 3
29. The attraction of a hydrogen atom in one molecule for a more electronegative element in another molecule is
what we call 4
30. The strongest ofthe above choices is 3
31. The weakest oft the above choices is 5
32. The bonding that is broken when you turn water into steam is 4
33. The bonding that is broken when you do electrolysis (splitting) of water molecules to form hydrogen and oxygen
is 1
34. The intramolecular force in hydrogen chloride is 1
35. The intramolecular force in carbon monoxide is 3
15
Updated 2/16/2017