

---

### Page 1

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
VSEPR THEORY
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES:
Learn how to draw Lewis structures for atoms which violate the octet rule.
Learn how to use Lewis structures and VSEPR and to predict the shapes of molecules.
Learn how to use the shape of a molecule to predict whether or not it is polar.
ExPERIMENTAL GOALS:
The purpose of this lab activity is to predict the VSEPR shape of those molecules, and whether
or not the molecules are polar.
MATERIALS:
Each group of students will need a molecular modeling kit.
INTRODUCTION:
What information do you already have that can help you modify two dimensional Lewis
structures into more accurate three dimensional models? You know that all electrons have the
same charge and that like charges repel. It is reasonable to assume that the electron pairs in
bonds will be oriented in a molecule as far from each other as possible. The valence electrons
should be expected to occupy regions of space SO that the shared pairs are evenly distributed
around the central atom.
There are several theories in chemistry that suggest explanations for bonding in molecules. Each
theory leads chemists to predict the shapes we will learn about today. The theory we will focus
on is one that describes equal distribution of electron pairs around a central atom; this theory is
known as the valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR theory). To begin, we must
delve into some of the exceptions that exist to the rules we learnt about in section 2.2.
VSEPR YOGA
K
*
*
*
*
*
* -
- -


---

### Page 2

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
EXCEPTIONS to 2.2!
Resonance Structures When One Lewis Structure Isn't Enough
## 03 (ozone)
## 18 valence electrons (3x6)
Place one O in the center, and connect the other two O's to it. Drawing a single bond
from the terminal O's to the one in the center uses four electrons; 12 of the remaining
electrons go on the terminal oxygens, leaving one lone pair on the central oxygen:
1
We can satisfy the octet rule on the central O by making a double bond either between
the left O and the central one (2), or the right O and the center one (3):
C
2
1
3
In this example, we can draw two Lewis structures that are energetically equivalent to
each other that is, they have the same types of bonds, and the same types of formal charges on
all of the structures, and both structures (2 and 3) are used to represent the molecule's structure.
The actual molecule is an average of structures 2 and 3, which are called resonance structures.
(Structure 1 is also a resonance structure of 2 and 3, but since it does not satisfy the octet rule, it
is a higher-energy resonance structure, and does not contribute as much to our overall picture of
the molecule.) Structures 2 and 3 in the example above are somewhat "fictional" structures, in
that they imply that there are "real" double bonds and single bonds in the structure for ozone; in
reality, however, ozone has two oxygen-oxygen bonds which are equal in length, and are
halfway between the lengths of typical oxygen-oxygen single bonds and double bonds
effectively, there are two "one-and-a-half" bonds in ozone. The real molecule does not alternate
back and forth between these two structures; it is a hybrid of these two forms.
The ozone molecule, then, is more correctly shown with both Lewis structures, with the
two-headed resonance arrow between them:
In these resonance structures, one of the electron pairs (and hence the
negative charge) is "spread out" or delocalized over the whole molecule.
In contrast, the lone pairs on the oxygen in water (to the right) are localized H
0- H
i.e., they're stuck in one place. Resonance delocalization stabilizes a
molecule by spreading out charges. Resonance plays a large role in our
understanding of structure and reactivity in organic chemistry.


---

### Page 3

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
As a general rule, when it's possible to make a double bond in more than one location,
and the resulting structures are energetically equivalent to each other, each separate structure
must be shown, separated from each other by resonance arrows.
CO32- (carbonate ion)
Multi-Center Molecules
Molecules with more than one central atoms are drawn similarly to the ones above. The
octet rule can be used as a guideline in many cases to decide in which order to connect atoms.
H H
1. C2H6
H
H
H H
3. CH3CH2OH
2. C2H4


---

### Page 4

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
"Violations" of the Octet Rule
A number of species violate the octet rule by having fewer than eight electrons around
the central atom or by having more than eight electrons around the central atom.
Electron deficient species, such as beryllium (Be), boron (B), nitrogen (N), and
aluminum (AI) can have fewer than eight electrons around the central atoms. Molecules
with electron deficient central atoms tend to be fairly reactive (many lectron-deficient
species act as Lewis acids).
Free radicals contain an odd number of valence electrons. One atom will have an odd
number of electrons, and will not have a complete octet in the valence shell. As a result,
these species are extremely reactive. When drawing these compounds, there are often
several possible resonance structures than can be drawn.
Expanded valence shells are often found in nonmetals from period 3 or higher, such as
sulfur, phosphorus, and chlorine. These species can accommodate more than 8 electrons
by shoving "extra" electrons into empty orbitals. Note that period 2 elements CANNOT
have more than eight electrons.
Examples:
$BF_3$
## 24 valence electrons (3 + 3x7)
F: :
-
:
The octet rule is not satisfied on the B, but this is the correct Lewis structure.
NO (nitrogen monoxide, or nitric oxide)


---

### Page 5

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
$PCI_5$
$SF_6$
$XeF_4$


---

### Page 6

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
The Shapes of Molecules (or Molecular Geometry): The VSEPR Model
Drawing a Lewis structure is the first steps towards predicting the three-dimensional
shape of a molecule. The shape of molecules strongly affect their physical properties, and is
very important in the way that biological molecules interact with each other.
Steps to determine the shape of a molecule:
1. Draw the Lewis structure for the molecule of interest and count the number of electron
groups surrounding the central atom. Each of the following constitutes an electron group:
a single, double or triple bond (multiple bonds count as one electron group)
a lone pair
an unpaired electron
2. Predict the arrangement of electron groups around each atom by assuming that the groups
are oriented in space as far away from one another as possible.
3. The shapes of larger molecules having more than one central are a composite of the
shapes of the atoms within the molecule, each of which can be predicted using the
VSEPR model (this is a larger scope that we will touch on in unit 3).
Two Electron Groups
180°
## 2 bonds, 0 lone pairs
linear
bond angles of 180°
Three Electron Groups
120°
<120°
## 3 bonds, 0 lone pairs
## 2 bonds, 1 lone pair
trigonal planar
bent
bond angles of 120°
bond angles of < 120°
Lone pairs take up more room than covalent bonds; this causes the other atoms to be
squashed together slightly, decreasing the bond angles by a few degrees.


---

### Page 7

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Four Electron Groups
109.50
<109.50
<109.50
## 4 bonds, 0 lone pairs
## 3 bonds, 1 lone pair
## 2 bonds, 2 lone pairs
tetrahedral
trigonal pyramidal
bent or angular
bond angles of 109.5°
bond angles of <109.5°
bond angles of <109.5°
**Note**
A dashed line means that bond is going backwards into the page you are viewing. A solid line
means that bond is found on the same, plane as the page you are looking at. A bolded line means
that bond is coming, forward out ofthe page you are viewing.
Five Electron Groups
180°
120°
<120°
## 5 bonds, 0 lone pairs 4 bonds, 1 lone pair 3 bonds, 2 lone pairs 2 bonds, 3 lone pairs
trigonal bipyramidal Seesaw or sawhorse
T-shaped
linear
bond angles of 120° bond angles of <120° bond angles of <90° bond angles of 180°
(equatorial),
(equatorial),
90° (axial)
<90° (axial)
The trigonal bipyramidal shape can be imagined as a group of
Cl Axial bonds
three bonds in a trigonal planar arrangement separated by bond angles of
120° (the equatorial positions), with two more bonds at an angle of 90°
to this plane (the axial positions).
Equatorial bonds
Lone pairs go in the equatorial positions, since they take up more room than covalent
bonds. In the equatorial position, lone pairs are -120° from other bonds, while in the axial
positions they would be 90° away from other bonds.


---

### Page 8

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Six Electron Groups
*,
-
<900°
90°
## 6 bonds, 0 lone pairs
## 5 bonds, 1 lone pair
## 4 bonds, 2 lone pairs
octahedral
square pyramidal
square planar
bond angles of 90°
bond angles of <90°
bond angles of 90°
T-shaped
Linear
## 3 bonds, 3 lone pairs
## 2 bonds, 4 lone pairs
T-shaped
Linear
bond angles of <90°
bond angles of 90°
and 180°
Examples
Methane (CH4)


---

### Page 9

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
## Polar and Nonpolar Covalent Bonds
Remember that when two bonded atoms have a difference of between 0.5 and 1.69
electronegativity units, the electrons are shared unequally, and the bond is a polar covalent
bond there is an unsymmetrical distribution of electrons between the bonded atoms, because
one atom in the bond is "pulling" on the shared electrons harder than the other, but not hard
enough to take the electrons completely away (as in an ionic bond). The more electronegative
atom in the bond has a partial negative charge (8), because the electrons are pulled slightly
towards that atom, and the less electronegative atom has a partial positive charge (8+), because
the electrons are partly (but not completely) pulled away from that atom. For example, in the
HCI molecule, chlorine is more electronegative than hydrogen by 0.96 electronegativity units.
The shared electrons are pulled slightly closer to the chlorine atom, making the chlorine end of
the molecule very slightly negative (indicated in the figure below by the larger electron cloud
around the CI atom), while the hydrogen end of the molecule is very slightly positive (indicated
by the smaller electron cloud around the H atom), and the resulting molecule is polar:
8
H
H
$CI$


---

### Page 10

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Molecular Shape and Polarity
In a diatomic molecule, there is only one bond, and the polarity of that bond determines
the polarity of the molecule: if the bond is polar, the molecule is polar, and if the bond is
nonpolar, the molecule is nonpolar.
In molecules with more than one bond, both shape and bond polarity determine whether
or not the molecule is polar. A molecule must contain polar bonds in order for the molecule to
be polar, but if the polar bonds are aligned exactly opposite to each other, or if they are
sufficiently symmetric, the bond polarities cancel out, making the molecule nonpolar. (Polarity
is a vector quantity (think back to science 10), SO both the magnitude and the direction must be
taken into account.)
For example, consider the Lewis dot structure for carbon dioxide. This is a linear
molecule, containing two polar carbon-oxygen double bonds. However, since the polar bonds
are pointing exactly 180° away from each other, the bond polarities cancel out, and the molecule
is nonpolar. (As an analogy, you can think of this is being like a game of tug of war between
two teams that are pulling on a rope equally hard.)
The water molecule also contains polar bonds, but since it is a bent molecule, the bonds
are at an angle to each other of about 105°. They do not cancel out because they are not pointing
exactly towards each other, and there is an overall dipole going from the hydrogen end of the
molecule towards the oxygen end of the molecule; water is therefore a polar molecule:
H
H


---

### Page 11

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Molecules in which all of the atoms surrounding the central atom are the same tend to be
nonpolar if there are no lone pairs on the central atom. If some of the atoms surrounding the
central atom are different, however, the molecule may be polar. For example, carbon
tetrachloride, CCI4, is nonpolar, but chloroform, CHCI3, and methyl chloride, CH3C1 are polar:
H
Cl
H
a
$CI$
H
nonpolar
polar
polar
C H
The polarity of a molecule has a strong effect on its physical properties. Molecules
which are more polar have stronger intermolecular forces between them (dipole-dipole and H-
bonding), and have, in general, higher boiling points (as well as other different physical
properties).
Examples
Methane (CH4)
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)


---

### Page 12

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Putting it all Together
Examples
Phosgene (COCI2)
Ethanol (CH3CH2OH)


---

### Page 13

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
## 2.3 Assignment/Lab Activity
Grab your molecular model kit and build the following molecules to help you fill in the table
below. You will have blank boxes as some molecular shapes are much more common than
others.
H20
$PCI_5$
$BF_3$
$SF_6$
$XeF_4$
N20
H3O+
$XeF_2$
$HCN$
$SF_4$
$CIF_3$
$CH_3F$
$NO$
O3
Note, this table utilized the AXE method. "A" is the central atom. "X" are the bonded atoms
(peripheral atoms). "E" if the unbound/lone pairs of electrons.
Shape
# Bonding #Lone
Molecular
Example
Pair(s)
electron
Geometry
**Specify whether your
pairs
example is polar of nonpolar
A-X
X--A-X
X
/
=
X


---

### Page 14

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Shape
# Bonding #Lone
Molecular
Example
Pair(s)
electron
Geometry
**Specify whether your
pairs
example is polar of nonpolar
X
Au X
X
E
Amy
X
X
E
E
f
X
Xu -
X


---

### Page 15

## 2.3 VSEPR Theory
Chemistry 30
Shape
# Bonding #Lone
Molecular
Example
Pair(s)
electron
Geometry
**Specify whether your
pairs
example is polar of nonpolar
X
-
2
E
X - X
x
E
E
$XI$
E
X
x
X.
X
X - E
A /
-