

---

### Page 1

Chemistry 30
## 3.1 Organic or Inorganic?
httpil/www.sciencechannel.com Ave-showsigreatest-diseerie.hideos/ioo-greatest
discoverics-shortssynthesis-ureal
The feat ofimitating nature in the laboratory was a truly exciting experience-as' Wôhler
expressed it in his often-quoted letter to Berzelius:
"I can no longer, so to speak, hold my chemical water and must tell you that I can make
urea without needing a kidney, whether of man or dog; the ammonium salt of cyanic acid is
urea." Wohler (1800-1882)
Urea is a chemical contained within our urine. It is produced as a by-product of protein metabolism in
cells. The comments above refer to the synthesizing of urea. Prior to Wohler's synthesis of urea from
inorganic compounds (1828), it was thought that naturally occurring compounds from plants or animals
were produced by some mysterious force which was called a vitalforce. It was believed that man would
never be ablet to synthesize these compounds. Friedrich Wohler, however, who had often seen thel long
thin crystals of urea when experimenting with waste products in urine, produced these same crystals
(accidentally) upon heating ammonium cyanate. Thus, with the old vital force theory disproved, many
other chemists began trying to synthesize organic compounds.
Wohler is also well-known for his inorganic chemistry interests, having successfully extracted aluminum
and beryllium from their compounds by chemical meansi in 1827. Among other contributions, he prepared
calcium carbide and discovered various silicon compounds, demonstrating close analogies to the
chemistry of carbon. Hei is also credited with the isolation of the elements yttrium and titanium and the
discovery that some meteoric stones contain organic matter.
The terms organic and inorganic are used to distinguish between two different groups of substances.
What comes to mind when you think of the words organic and inorganic?
Organic substances are considered to include all compounds of carbon except oxides of carbon,
carbonates, carbides and cyanides. These exceptions, plus the substances of the remaining elements are
considered to be inorganic. Three to four million organic compounds are known compared with only
about 50 000 inorganic compounds.
Organic substances include those derived from living organisms as well as numerous synthetic
substances.


---

### Page 2

Chemistry 30
Examples of organic materials are:
Macronutrients (lipids, proteins, carbohydrates)
Fuels
Greases and lubricating oils
Fabrics (cotton, wool, rayon, nylon, polyesters)
Wood and paper products
Antibiotics and vitamins
Dyes and pigments
Soaps and detergents
Cosmetics
Some agricultural chemicals (some fertilizers, insecticides and pesticides)
Perfumes and flavours
Some explosives
Paints, varnishes and lacquers
Plastics and elastomer
It should be mentioned that not everyone agrees where the distinction between organic
and inorganic compounds should be!
One definition that was in common use: "Using or produced with fertilizers of only animal or vegetable
matter." V Another is the one used by scientists until about 1850, from which the: first is derived: "Of or
derived from living organisms." " Buti the one we use in chemistry is this: "Carbon containing compounds."
As for compounds being created synthetically in labs, not only do they have properties similar to organic
compounds; they are organic compounds. In fact there is no difference whatsoever between the synthetic
compound and the one extracted by living organisms.
Thus, some state the definition of organic compounds simply that:
"Organic substances contain hydrogen combined with carbon; inorganic substances don't."
While another has stated that:
"II believe that "organic" VS. 'inorganic" originally stemmed from the ancient idea that compounds could
be divided into two categories; those isolated from plants and animals (organic) and those extracted from
minerals and ores (inorganic). Plants and animals are highly efficient chemical factories. In order to
maintain their living condition, organisms must synthesize numerous carbon-based molecules. Since all
the courses of carbon compounds originally came solely from living organisms, the chemistry of carbon
was called organic chemistry. As a working definition, now we think of organic chemistry as primarily
being the chemistry of carbon-containing compounds. Most carbon-containing compounds have one or
more of the following: H, N, O, S, P. Some authors describe organic chemistry as the study of compounds
that contain carbon and hydrogen. By this definition, CO2 would be "inorganic.' " But I would like to stress
that in fact there is no general agreement on such semantics, and I'd bet that a lot of chemists consider
CO2 to be "organic" because it contains C and O."
So, where should the distinction be? Is CO2 organic or inorganic? Are organic compounds only ones that
were once-living? It seems that people who think that CO2 is organic are int the minority, and thus, for the
purpose of Chemistry 30, we will consider CO2 to be inorganic and go with the original distinction
mentioned in the examples above. As for the synthetically created organic compounds = the majority of
chemists consider these to be organic, SO again, we will use this for the purposes oft this course.


---

### Page 3

Chemistry 30
Did you know?
1.) Bones and teeth, the hard tissues in the human body, are made partly of organic
and partly of inorganic material. The inorganic component mainly consists ofa
substance called hydroxyapatite. The simplest formula ofl hydroxyapatite is
Cas(PO.)3(OH).
The outer layer of your teeth is the hardest material in your body and is called
enamel. Enamel consists of approximately 92% hydroxyapatite. Enamel is a
ceramic material.
Beneath the enamel, the bulk of a tooth is made of dentin. This is a composite
material and contains a mixture ofl hydroxyapatite, collagen, water, and salts.
Collagen is an organic substance.
http://www.seribd.com/doc/2408143814329/0nganicor-inorganicaseribd
2.) Pearls, including freshwater pearls are delicate organic gems that are made of
the natural product called calcium carbonate. This product is drawn from the
lake or river by the mussel that the pearl lives in.
Your freshwater pearls were once living and growing SO you will need to make
sure that as with all living things they stay out of harm. The products that
harm pearls most are the very things that the woman who loves pearls
probably wears without a second thought. You've guessed it already - the
most harmful product to a pearl is the application of perfume, hair spray and
cosmetics and face creams when the owner is wearing the pearls
httpl/www.fashion-
emcmlsepleylsudlery how to care for pearls.htm
3.) Some organic molecules, such as amino acids have been found in interstellar
space where there are: no living things. (How, then could this organic molecule
be produced by a vitalforce?)
4.) Organic Chemistry has just recently been expanded to include compounds of
Silicon since Silicon is similar in behavior to Carbon (why is this???). Given that
the main material in which micro-chips of the computer age have as their
foundation is Silicon, isn't it fitting that the main element establishing living
organisms should be merged with the main element involved in the inanimate
machine world?
htp://www.seribd.om/doc/240814929/Organicor-inorganicescribd


---

### Page 4

Chemistry 30
## 3.1 Assignment
Below is a list of a variety of substances. Complete the chart that follows; an example has been provided
for you. Remember that organic compounds are compounds that were either once-living or derived from
something that was once. living, or, they can be synthesized.
Table salt (Sodium Chloride = NaCI)
Crystal structure of NaCI
Butter (containing triglycerides)
1

$TATuRA$

A lipid (triglyceride) molecule)
Coal (made of C (60-90%), H, O and in some cases, S)
Example chemical structure of coal


---

### Page 5

Chemistry 30
Piece of iron (Fe)
bcc
fcc
hcp
a
o Be a . 20 o a
à
a
The three crystal structures of iron:
body-centered cubic, face-centered
cubic and hexagonal close-packed.
Hydrochloric acid (HCI)
r HYOROCI IU
$ACID$
H
Paper (containing cellulose)
$OH$
HO OH
$OH$
$OH$
$HO$
Cellulose (a linear polymer of glucose)
Ball and Stick model of cellulose


---

### Page 6

Chemistry 30
Sapphire
(from the mineral 'corundum', which is mostly pure Al203,
with some traces of iron, titanium or chromium to give the different colors)
Aluminum oxide (Al2O3)
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
$CO$
- -
$0=C-O$
Solid CO2 subliming
Naturally-produced Urea
H,N
$NH_2$


---

### Page 7

Chemistry 30
Turpentine
(a fluid composed of different types of terpenes (such as pinene) obtained
by the distillation of resin obtained from trees, mainly pine trees.)
$PARKS$
P
urpentine
Tuetewts - o
WR -
The Pinene Molecule
Quartz (SiO2)
Diamond


---

### Page 8

Chemistry 30
yntneticalyproduced Urea
$H_2N$
$NH_2$
Freshwater Pearls (90% CaCO3)
(A pearl is a hard, rounded object produced within the soft tissue (specifically the mantle) of a living
shelled mollusk. Just like the shell of mollusks, a pearl is composed of calcium carbonate in minute
crystalline form, which has been deposited in concentric layers. Its chemical composition is about 90%
calcium carbonate; the rest is water and organic materials.)
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
60j
$HO$
-
I

HO -

$HO$
$OH$


---

### Page 9

Chemistry 30
Cinnabar (a mineral of mercury (II) sulfide, HgS)
Cinnabar unit cell 3D
Water
Hydio
A
Hydroger
Milk (containing proteins, lactose and lipids)
Lactose
$CH_2OH$
uIN
O
CH2OH o
$HO$
$OH$
## 3 O
$OH$
$OH$
€
$OH$
$OH$


---

### Page 10

Chemistry 30
ASA (Acetylsalicylic acid)
$OH$
$CH_3$
Aspirin
Acetylsalicylic Acid
$CgHg_94$
Bees Wax Candle
(Hexa-decanel is hardened bees wax. The discovery of the exact formula for bees wax led to the
creation ofall the automobile waxes, motor oils, and heavy wax base greases used in the automotive and
trucking industry.)
Hexa-decanel


---

### Page 11

Chemistry 30
Name of Substance - be Source/Origin of Substance
Organic or Inorganic?
specific
Casein (protein found in milk)
milk
Organic
Salt