

---

### Page 1

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
Naming Organic Molecules
0
H
Formal-dehyde
Casual-dehyde
Three Categories:
1. Naming Hydrocarbons
2. Cyclic Hydrocarbons
3. Functional Groups
1


---

### Page 2

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
Complex Branches
To complicate the naming of organic molecules, the branches
on the parent chain can have branches themselves. The
branched branch is numbered (starting at the carbon attached
to the main chain as number 1) and the position of the
branches on the branch indicated using this numbering
scheme. The complex substituent is then placed in
parentheses to remove any confusion over numbering.
Example 1.)
The compound is named: -d-thyprop.Dnonane
Note :
thatp putting the branched branch inj parentheses clearly designates the '1' as referring to the position oft the ethyl group on the propyl branch
(numbered in the above diagram).
thatt the carbon of the propyl branch that is attached to the main chaini is designated '1.
Example 2.)
This compoundi is named: -C-mehyehyp-sC-methypropldndrcane
Note: -
that the methylethyl proceeds methylpropyl: alphabetically.
that whent therei is no preference in numbering right-to-left or left-to-right on the parent chain, the convention is to givet the substituent that comes
first alphabetically the lower number.
2


---

### Page 3

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
Complex Branches
There are a number of common names used for smaller
complex substituents. This has arisen from past attempts to
provide a systematic method for naming complex organic
molecules. These common names identify the branched
branches and attachment points of the branch(es) within this
complex substituent. (NOTE: in the following examples the
parent chain of the entire molecule is referred to as "R",a
common shorthand in organic chemistry).
Number ofC Atoms
Line Drawing
Name
3
R
isopropyl
isobutyl
R
sec-butyl
<
tert-butyl
isopentyi
5
sec-pentyl
Notes ont the use oft these names:
isois consideredt to be ap part oft the name of the alkyl group and so the letter "i"is used to place the groupsi in alphabetical order.
the other prefixes, which arel hyphenated, are not considered to be aj part oft the group's name when placing the groups in alphabetical order. E.g.
sec-butylis placedi in order by the letter' "b" (not' "s").
3


---

### Page 4

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
Try it on your own
Example 1
Example 2
4


---

### Page 5

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
2.A cyclic hydrocarbon is a compound that contains a
hydrocarbon ring and has cycloin its name
Cycloalkanes: ring contains only single bonds
H2
H2
H2C CH2 H2รง CH2
C-
H2C CH2
H2 H2
H2
Cyclopentane
Cyclohexane
3-cyclopentylhexane
Condensed structural formula
Skeletal structure
Line structure
**Numbering of ring must start at a substituent branch. If there
are multiple branches, number in a way that gives the lowest
branch numbers. if there is only 1 branch-no numbering is
needed. Otherwise, naming is very similar to hydrocarbon
alkanes
Example 1
$CH_2$
$CH_2$
$CH_2$
Example 2
$CH_3$
$CH_3$
$CH_3$
5


---

### Page 6

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
Cycloalkenes: ring contains 1 or more double bonds
**similar to cycloalkanes, however, ending must be changed to
"ene"
Example 1
$CH_3$
$CH_3$
$CH$
$CH_3$
Example 2
H
H.
or
H
H
H
6


---

### Page 7

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
2. Function Groups are specific groups of atoms within
molecules that are responsible for the characteristics of that
molecule
Some common functional groups are listed in the table
below
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 687
Table 23-4
COMMON FUNCTIONAL GROUPS FOUND IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
GENERAL STRUCTURE
GROLP NAME
$EXAMPLE$
H H
R-0-H
alcohol
H
H
ethanol
H H
H B
H
R-0-R"
ether
H-
H ethoxyethane
H H
H H
- o
0
R- C
aldehyde
H- C
methanal
H
H
9
H
R-C- -R'
ketone
H-
propanone
H
H
H
N
acid
H-
ethanoic acid
$OH$
H OH
9
H H
H
R--0--C-R'
ester
H-
H ethyl acetate
H H
H
H
H
R-N
amine
H-
methylamine
H
H
H
*R and R' symbolize the general hydrocarbon group of the molecule, They may be the same group or different groups.
7


---

### Page 8

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
1. Alcohols:
Contains 1 or more -OH (hydroxy!) groups that replace an H atom on
the hydrocarbon chain
This group makes the compound polar.
Alcohols are miscible with waterand are good fuels (flammable).
Naming:
1. Find the parent chain. Name according to hydrocarbon
naming rules.
2. Replace the final "e" with the ending "-ol"
3. A number with a hyphen indicates which C atom the -OH
group is found on
4. If more than one-OH group is present, use prefixes before the -ol
Organic Names
Identilyt the
the
longest
ertiyie
carbon chain
group
propane
alcohol
drop' "e"
add"ol"
propane CH3CH2CH20H) alcoh@)
propanol
Examples
Ophard,o 2003
HO-CH3
HO-CHPCH-CH-CH3
$CH_3$
HO-CHz-CH-CH3
HO-CHe-CH-CH3
$CH_3$
CH2-CH2
I
I
OH OH
8


---

### Page 9

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
2. Aldehyde
e Contain a carbonyl functional group bonded to a hydrocarbon chain
and a hydrogen atom
can have pleasant odor (ie. oil of cinnamon)
-
R
1
Naming:
1. Find the parent chain. Name according to hydrocarbon
naming rules.
2. Replace the final "e" with the ending "-al"
3. No numbering is needed because carbonyl group is always at end of
chain
Example 1
I
-
H
Example 2
CH;
$CH$
H;C
H2
9


---

### Page 10

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
3. Ketone
Contain a carbonyl group bonded to two other hydrocarbon
chains
, similar properties to aldehydes
Naming:
-
R
1. Find the parent chain. Name according to hydrocarbon
naming rules.
2. Replace the final "e" with the ending "-one"
Example 1
O
$H_3C$
$CH_3$
Example 2
H-C-H
10


---

### Page 11

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
Functional Groups greatly increase the number of
isomers of a molecule
4. Carboxylic Acids:
Contain one or more carboxyl groups -COOH
polar and reactive
Give the molecule weak acidic properties
Naming:
1. Find the parent chain. Name according to hydrocarbon
naming rules.
2. Replace the final "e" with the ending "-anoic acid"
Example 1
CH3 CH2 COOH
Example 2
$OH$
11


---

### Page 12

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
5. Ester
are produced from a reaction between an acid and an alcohol
(esterification)
e dehydration reaction
possess distinct aromas and flavors
Carboxylic Acid
Alcohol
Ester
- - -
(
a
Iy
A, H"
$II$
R-C+O-H + R-OH,
R -C-O-R + H20
Acid
Alcohol
Water- Forming
Fragment
Fragment
portions
Naming:
1. Identify the alcohol and carboxylic acid
2. Change the ending of the alcohol to "yl" (treat it like a
branch but don't assign a number)
3. Name the parent strand of the carboxylic acid but remove
the "e" and change the ending to "oate"
Example 1
$CH_2CH_3$
$H_3CH_2C$
Example 2
CH3CH2CH2-C
0-CH3
12


---

### Page 13

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
A compound can contain multiple (and different)
functional groups
6. Alkyl Halides:
Contain one or more halogen groups (group 17)
a higher boiling points and more reactive than basic alkane
chains
Naming:
1. Find the parent chain. Name according to hydrocarbon
naming rules.
2. If the halide group is anywhere but the 1st C atom, a
number with a hyphen indicates which C atom the halide
group is found on
3. Name the compound as if the halide is a simple branch
Example 1
CH3 CHFCH2 CH3
$CH_3$
Example 2
I
$CH_2$
CHz-CH-C-CH3
F
I
13


---

### Page 14

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
For each molecule, choose the correct
functional group from the list below the
structure.
$H_3C$
H-C-C=C-CHs CH)/CHCHOH)CHE
Alkane
$H_3C$
Alkene
$H_3C$
Alkyne
CH3)2C-CHCH3
$CO_2H$
$H_3C$
Alcohol
Ester
$II$
CHACH.NHCHICHy,
Amine
(CHa)sCCH2CH
Ether
Aldehyde
$CH_3$
Check
Carboxylic acid
$C_2H_5$
Answer
14


---

### Page 15

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
## 3.3 Assignment
1. Place the following substances in order of increasing boiling point.
2-cloropentane
1-bromohexane
butane
2-iodopentane
3-methylpentane
2. Write the correct IUPAC name for the compounds below
$OH$
a)
f)
CH;
b)
$II$
g)
HC-
CH-CH
$OH$
C)
h) CH,CHCH,CH-CHCH,
CH, I CH,
d)
i)
CH;
o
H
e)
$OH$
J)
15


---

### Page 16

## 3.3 Notes-Naming Cyclic and Functional Groups.
## 3.3 Assignment Cont...
3. Draw the correct structure for the following names
a) 2-chloro-1-propano!
b) ,3-dibromo-4-chlorocyclohexane
c) chon22dimethypopane
d) cyclohexanone
e) 3,3 dimethylbutanoic acid
f) 2ethy-4-methypentana
g) ethyl haxanoate
16