

---

### Page 1

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
SOMETIMESIWISHORGANIG
Organic Reactions
CHEMISTBVHAD A FACE
Most organic compounds are
hydrocarbons that come from
petroleum.. then how do we
see such a wide variety of
organic molecules? Chemical
Reactions!
Types of Organic Reactions
1. Substitution
2. Elimination
$SOLCOULDPUNCH$
3. Addition
To
4. Condensation
1


---

### Page 2

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
1. Substitution Reactions
A reaction in which one atom or a group of atoms in a
molecule is replaced by another atom or groups of atoms.
Halogenation-a hydrogen atom is replaced by Chlorine,
Fluorine or Bromine on an alkane (lodine is less reactive and
therefore doesn't substitute well)
In general,
R-CH3 + X2 --> R-CH2X + HX
More specifically,
H
H
H-C-H + CI-CI
H-C-CI + CI-H
H
H
Once an alkane has been halogenated, the compound can
undergo further substitutions
In general,
R-CH2X + OH -> R-OH + X
8+ s
More specifically,
CH3-CH2-Br
CHs-CH2 + :Br
-
:0:
:0:
A
H
**This can also be accomplished by add water to the reaction;
in this case an alcohol and a binary acid with form
2


---

### Page 3

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
2. Elimination Reactions
A reaction in which a combination of atoms is removed from
two adjacent C atoms forming an additional bond between the
C atoms.
eliminated atoms form stable compounds such as H20, HCI
or H2
Dehydrogenation-a reaction that eliminates two hydrogen
atoms
In general,
CH3CH3 --> CH2CH2 + H2
H,Ç-CH,
$HC=CH,$
More specifically,
+ H2
Catalyst
Alykyl halides can under elimination reactions to produce an
alkene and a binary acid
In general, R-CH2-CHe-X -> R-CHE=CH2 + HX
Alcohols can undergo elimination reactions by losing a H+ and
an OH- to form water dehydration reaction)
In general, R-CHa-CHa-OH -> R-CH=CH2 + H20
3


---

### Page 4

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
3. Addition Reaction
A reaction in which a other atoms bond to each of two atoms
bonded by a double or triple bond
reverse of an elimination reaction
hydration reaction
Figure 23-18
Addition Reactions with Alkenes
These examples are common
H
addition reactions that can be
$OH$
hydrogenation reaction
carried out with alkenes. Many
H C C H
other addition reactions are
H
possible.
Water
H H
H,9 Hydrogen
Alcohol
C-H
Hz
H H
H
Hydrogen halide
Alkane
$HX$
H X
H
H
Halogen
Alkene
%
- C C- a
X X
H H
C
H
Alkyl halide
H H
Alkyl dihalide
Alkynes can also be nydrogenated to produce alkenes or
alkanes
1st H2 molecule
R-C
$C-H + H_2-→ R-C=CH_2$
1nd H2 molecule
R-C=CH2 + H2 -> R-CH2-CH3
4


---

### Page 5

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
4. Condensation
A reaction in which two smaller organic molecules combine to
form a more complex molecule accompanied by the loss of a
small molecule such as water
Esterfication is a type of condensation reaction:
0
$II$
H*
R- C -0-H + H-0-R'
R-
0--R' + H,0
a carboxylic
an alcohol
an ester
acid
FIGURE A.
(Where R and R' are general hydrocarbon groups)
Condensation reactions are essential for living organisms:
H
H
H2N )
$H_2N$
$OH$
$OH$
R1
R2
Amino
Acid
Amino
Acid
H
-
$H_2N$
$OH$
R1
H R2
Amino Acid Amino
Acid
5


---

### Page 6

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
Predicting Products of Organic Reactions
You can use the generic equations you have been provided to
predict the products of specific organic reactions:
Steps:
1. Draw the structure of the reactant(s)
2. Use the generic equation as a model to see how the
reactant(s) would react
3. Draw the structure of the likely product(s)
Example 1: Predict the product of the elimination of 1-butanol
Example 2: Predict the product of the reaction between
cyclopentene and hydrogen bromide
Example 3: Label each reaction as a substitution, elimination,
addition or condensation reaction
$CH_3CH_2CI$
$CH_3CH_3$
CH3CH20H + CH3CO2H
$CH_2=CH_2$
CH3-O)OCHACH:
6


---

### Page 7

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
## 3.4 Assignment
1. Classify each of the following reactions as either
substitution, elimination, addition, or condensation.
a. CH,CH-CHCH,CH, + Hz 1
CH,CHy-CHyCH,CH,
b.
CH,CH,CH,CHCHy * CH,CH,CH = CHCH3 + H20
$OH$
2. Identify the type of organic reaction that would
best accomplish each of the following conversions.
a. alkyl halide 1 alkene
b. alkene 1 alcohol
C. alcohol + carboxylic acid 1 ester
3. - Complete each of the following equations by writ-
ing the condensed structural formula for the prod-
uct that is most likely to form.
a. CH,CH-CHCH,CH, + H,-
b. CH,CH,CHCH,CH3 + OH
G. CH,CH,C=CCH, + 2H2 1
d.
Dehydration
CH,CH,CHCH,CH3
*
$OH$
4. Identify the type of organic reaction seen below then predict the product(s).
a) ethene + HBr ->
b) 1-bromopropane + OH
c) ethanol + propanoic acid ->
23.dimetry-1-butene + H2 ->
7


---

### Page 8

## 3.4 Organic Reactions
## 3.4 Assignment KEY Cont...
5. Explain why the hydration reaction involving 1-butene may yield two
distinct products whereas the hydration of 2-butene yields only 1 product.
6. Explain the difference between an elimination reaction and a
condensation reaction. Which type of reaction best is best represented by
the following equation?
HO = CH,CH,CH,CH, - OH 1
+ H,0
7. Functional groups give organic compounds distinct properties that may
be used to identify the type of compound present. Suppose to examined
the properties of several compounds and made the following observations:
Compound 1-liquid that has a pungent odour. It is miscible with water and
the solution is a weak electrolyte.
Compound 2-is a liquid that has a strong aroma resembling apricots.
Using your observations, classify the functional group in each compound.
8