

---

### Page 1

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
Unit 4 - Solutions and Solubility
4.1- Characteristics of Solutions
P8 439-445 in Heath
P8 452-458 in Matter and Change
H
C

sugar cube dissolving in water
Basic Definitions:
Heat of Solution - the overall heat energy change that occurs during the
solution process formation
Solvation - the interaction between solute and solvent particles
1


---

### Page 2

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
A solution is two or more substances combined to form a homogeneous
mixture (made up of solvent and solute). Solutions can be gaseous, liquid
or solid (or a combination of two or more states).
Recall that a homogeneous mixture is uniform and the individual parts
of the mixture are indistinguishable.
ex)
These are opposed to heterogeneous mixtures where you can see the
separate components of the mixture.
ex)
In any given solution, there are always the following two parts:
i. Solvent - this is the most abundant substance.
ii. Solute - this is the least abundant substance(s).
These roles in a solution can be reversed if the composition of the
solution changes.
For example, in a 5% alcohol solution, water is the solvent and alcohol is
the solute. However, if more alcohol is added to make a 70% alcohol
solution then the alcohol will be the solvent and the water will be the
solute.
Examples of Mixtures:
Liquid -
Gas -
Solid-
Solid and liquid -
Gas and liquid-
2


---

### Page 3

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
An aqueous solution is a solution in which the solvent is water. We
will deal with aqueous solutions frequently.
When a solute (like NaCI) is introduced to a solvent (like water) the
solute will begin to dissolve. If you are able to keep adding a solute to a
solution, the solution is called unsaturated.
Eventually, if you keep adding a solute, it will not be able to dissolve
into the solution anymore. At this point, we call the solution saturated.
When a solution becomes saturated, it reaches equilibrium. A solution
that is at equilibrium means the rate at which a solute enters the
solution is equal to the rate at which it drops out of the solution.
For example, a saturated solution of salt and water appears as if
undissolved salt sits at the bottom of the solution.
initially:
at equilibrium:
However, at the molecular level, dissolved salt is constantly leaving the
water and being replaced by undissolved salt. When a system is in
equilibrium, the rate at which dissolved solute is replaced by
undissolved solute is the same.
Equilibrium equations look like:
3


---

### Page 4

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
Solubility refers to the amount of substance needed to make a
saturated solution at a specific temperature.
At a specific temperature, the amount of solid solute capable of
dissolving in a given volume of solvent is fixed. That is, at a given
temperature, if too much solute is added it will generally accumulate at
the bottom of the solution.
In general, an increase in Temperature will increase the solubility of
solids in liquids, but decrease the solubility of gasses in liquids.
For example, the amount of oxygen in a river is dependant on the
temperature of the water.
0,08
0,07
0,06
-02
0,05
0,04
0,03
0,02
0,01
engineeringtolboxcom
## 0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Water Temperature (deg C)
However, increase in pressure will increase the solubility of gasses.
For example, if pop is pressurized there will be a lot of gas in the pop
(it will taste fizzy). Once it is open, the solubility of gas is decreased
SO gas escapes (it gets flat).
Gas Solubility - Effect of Pressure
. 1
(a)
(b)
(C)
Initial equilibrium
Increasedp pressure
Newe equilibrium
4


---

### Page 5

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
Substances that have similar bonds between molecules (not within
molecules) tend to make good solutions.
This is often stated as like dissolves like. That is if two substances have
intermolecular bonds that are alike, they will make a solution.
For example, if two substances have polar bonds, they will mix well
together.
When mixing some substances together, sometimes there is no apparent
limit to the solubility of solute in the solvent.
For example, no matter the proportion of ethanol in water, you will always
have a solution. This is because both the water molecules and ethanol
molecules are polar, SO they arrange themselves SO that the positive side of
water is attracted to the negative side of ethanol.
Components of a solution that act as water and ethanol do together are
called miscible.
However, when two substance are mixed together and form distinct layers
that is they do not dissolve in each other, are called immiscible.
This is due to one component being polar and the other being non-polar
> For example, water and vegetable oil are immiscible.
Thus, non-polar substances dissolve best in non-polar substances and visa
versa. Or, like dissolves like.
5


---

### Page 6

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
Forming Solutions
Solvation of Ionic Solids (Dissociation)
- When ionic solids are added to water, the charged ions are
surrounded by water (hydration), and eventually the ions are
separated and the crystal structure is decomposed (dissociation)
These solutions conduct electricity; therefore, they are known
as electrolytes.
-
H,0
Naclo - Na* (aq) + CI (aq)
Solvation of Molecular Solids
i)
the "rule of thumb" is "like dissolves like".
Molecular substances enter solution, molecular form
remains.
Polar substances will not mix with non-polar substances as the
particles in each substance are not attracted to one another.
Polar substances will dissolve in each other, and the same occurs
with non-polar substances.
*
&
a
<
ii)
Molecular substances enter solution, ions form that were not
previously present
Most often occurs with acids (ie. HCI)
Molecular substances that are not acids do not ionize or
dissociate; therefore, do not form ion solutions
6


---

### Page 7

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
## 2.1 - Characteristics of Solutions Assignment
READING: How Solutions are Formed: Read Handout and create
concept map based on the information in the notes and in the handout.
Key words that need to be included: solution, dissolving, dissociation,
ionization, solute-solvent, solute-solute, solvent-solvent, endothermic,
exothermic, electrolytes, non-Plectrolytes, molecular substance, ionic
substance.
7


---

### Page 8

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
Determine whether each of the following substances will undergo
dissociation, ionization or dissolving. Then write solvation equations for
each of the substances when mixed with water. Show physical states of
the products and balance the equations.
1. sodium chloride - Ionic; therefore will undergo dissociation in water
H20
NaClg)
Na+ (aq) + Cl (ag)
2. carbon tetrachloride
3. sodium hydroxide
4. ammonium acetate
5. potassium hydroxide
6. sulfuric acid
7. potassium dichromate
8


---

### Page 9

## 4.1 - Characteristics of Solutions
8. nitric acid
9. copper (II) sulfate pentahydrate
10. potassium permanganate
11. sodium bicarbonate
12. sulfur dioxide
13. hydrochloric acid
9