

---

### Page 1

## 4.2 - Concentration
## 4.2 Concentration
P8 117-120 in Heath
P8 462-466 in Matter and Change
A4
- - n -
Diluted *
Concentrated
Solution Concentration Handout
1


---

### Page 2

## 4.2 - Concentration
Chem 30
SOLUTION CONCENTRATIONS
There are many different ways to express concentrations:
1. Using Percents to Describe Concentrations:
i) Percent by mass:
Also called weight percent or percent by weight.
Usually describes solutions in which a solid is dissolved in a liquid.
mass of solute
$Percent by Mass =$
100
mass of solution
the mass of the solution is equal to the mass of the solute plus the mass of the solvent.
Example 1: A: solution consists of 30 grams of sodium chloride and 70 grams of water would
be 30% sodium chloridel by mass
30g Nacl
$< 100 = 30%$
(30g NaCl + 70g of water)
ii) Percent by Volume:
Typically used for mixtures of liquids.
volume of solute
$Percent by Volume =$
x100
volume of solution
Example: If we mix; 30mL of ethanol and 70mL of water, the percent ethanol by volume will be
30%. Note that 30mL of ethanol and 70mL of water will NOT be exactly 100mL but is will be
close - this is because of the molecules of ethanol and water will behave differently with each
than they do with themselves.
2. Mass per unit volume:
Often used when describing how soluble a material is in water.
Ex. The solubility of a substance. Xi is 3 grams per litre.
Units: mg/mL, mg/cm3 (note that imL = 1cm3)
3. Molarity (M)
The number of moles of solute dissolved in 1 litre of solution.
moles of solute
$Molarity(M) =$
litres of solution
Changes slightly with temperature because volume can change with temperature.
Example: If we. have 90 grams of glucose (molar mass = 18ograms per mole) this would be
## 0.50 moles of glucose. Ifwej place this in a flask and add water until thei total volume is 1L we
would have a 0.5 molar solution.
4. Molality (m)
The number of moles of solute dissolved: in one kilogram of solvent. *Key difference
from molarity is that molality uses mass rather than volume and uses solvent rather
than solution.
Does not change with temperature because mass remains constant.
moles of solute
$Molality(m) =$
kilograms of solven
2


---

### Page 3

## 4.2 - Concentration
Chem 30
SOLUTION CONCENTRATIONS
5. Parts per million (PPM)
Works like percent by mass but makes more sense when there is only a small amount of
solute present.
mass of solute
$PPM: =$
<1000000
mass of solution
A solution with a concentration of 1ppm has 1 gram of substance for every million grams
of solution or think of it as 1ppm implies one milligram of solute per litre of solution.
$1ppm = img/L$
1% = 10 oooppm, therefore something that has a concentration of 300ppm could also
be said to have a concentration of (300ppm)/(10 00pm/peremp-0.034 by mass.
6. Parts per billion (PPB)
One particle of a given substance: for every 999,999,999 other particles.
mass of solute
$PPB =$
x 109
mass of solvent
7- Mole Fraction
The ratio of the number of moles of a solute in solution to the total number of moles of
solute and solvent.
Xis commonly used for mole fraction with a subscript to indicate the solvent or solute.
X4 nA
n4 +ng
3


---

### Page 4

## 4.2 - Concentration
Often, we are concerned with how much solute is dissolved in a solvent.
A solution with a relatively small amount of solute dissolved is called a
dilute solution.
Likewise, we call a solution with a relatively large amount of solute a
concentrated solution.
Note that these terms are strictly qualitative. They do not tell us anything
about the actual amount of solute but are useful in comparing solutions.
However; there are multiple ways that we can quantitatively express the
concentration of a solution (see handout)
la. Percent by Mass: In order to maintain a sodium chloride concentration
similar to ocean water, an aquarium must contain 3.6g Nacl per 100.0g of
water. What is the percent mass of Nac1 in the solution?
1b. Percent by Volume: What is the percent by volume of ethanol in a
solution that contains 35 mL of ethanol dissolved in 115mL of water?
4


---

### Page 5

## 4.2 - Concentration
3. Molarity (M): the amount of moles dissolved in 1 liter of a solution.
This is a measure of concentration. The units for this are M, mols/L,
or mols L-1.
# of moles of solute
moles)
$C =$
where C = concentration or molarity
V
L
V = volume of solution (L)
Ex) What is the molarity of a 3.50 L solution containing 2.86 moles of
NaC1?
Keep in mind that molarity takes into account the volume of both the
solute and the solvent, and not just the solvent. Or, the volume of the
solution.
We can express the concentration of a solution as "0.50 M NaOH".
Square brackets may also be used to express concentration.
$Ex) NaOH] = 0.50 M$
5


---

### Page 6

## 4.2 - Concentration
Another equation to calculate molarity is:
wt
moles)
$C =$
where: C = concentration or molarity
mmV
L
$wt = mass (g)$
mm = molar mass of solute g
mol/
V = volume of solution (L)
Ex) Antifreeze is a solution of ethylene glycol, C 2H1602 in water. If
## 4.50 L of antifreeze contains 27.5 8 of ethylene glycol, what is the
concentration of the solution?
Ex) What mass of sodium carbonate, Na 2CO3 is present in 50.00 mL of a
## 0.750 M solution?
Ex) What volume of 1.50 mol/L HCI solution contains 10.0 8 of
hydrochloric acid?
6


---

### Page 7

## 4.2 - Concentration
5. Parts per Million (ppm) - ppm is defined as the number of parts
solute for every million parts of a solution.
For example, 1 ppm means there is 1 gram of solute per 1 million grams
of solution.
ppm = grams of solute
X 106
grams of solution
6. Parts per Billion (ppb) - defined as the number of parts solute for
every billion parts of solution
ppb = grams of solute
X 109
grams of solution
Ex) You add 11 mg of sulfuric acid to 2,000 grams of water. What is the
resulting concentration of sulfuric acid, in ppm?
We can convert these quantities to molarity. Most of the time the solvent
will be water. Recall that molarity is measured in mols/L, SO we need to
always work our way towards L.
Note - 1 g H20 = 1 mL H,0 (1kg HO = 1L H,0)
We can also convert ppm into a molarity using a conversion process.
The relationship above will be very important. The molar mass of the
substance will be needed for this process.
7


---

### Page 8

## 4.2 - Concentration
PPM to Molarity:
$molarity =$
concentration in mg/L
(molecular weight of the solute) X 1,000
$**1 ppm = 1mg/L$
Ex) A sample of water contains 25 ppm of lead ions, Pb2+. Convert this
concentration to M. The molar mass for Pb2+ is 206.2 g/mol.
Molarity to PPM:
Ex) A solution contains Cu2+ ions at a concentration of 3.0 X 10-4 M.
What is the Cu2+ concentratrion in ppm? The molar mass of Cu is
## 63.55 g/mol
8


---

### Page 9

## 4.2 - Concentration
Preparing a Standard (Stock) Solution:
Standard Solutions: solutions containing a precise mass of solute
are called standard solutions are prepared using a volumetric flask
Example: How could you prepare a 1L solution of a 1.50M
aqueous solution of sucrose (C12H22011) for an experiment?
Wash bottle
Volume marker-
(calibration mark)
Weighed
amount
ofs solute.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 4.10
Steps involved in the preparation of a standard aqueous solution. (a) Put a weighed amount of a substance
(the solute) into the volumetric flask, and add a small quantity of water. (b) Dissolve the solid in the water
by gently swirling the flask (with the stopper in place). (C) Add more water (with gentle swirling until the
level of the solution just reaches the mark etched on the neck of the flask. Then mix the solution
thoroughly by inverting the flask several times.
What if you only need 100 mL of a 1.5 M solution of sucrose?
9


---

### Page 10

## 4.2 - Concentration
## 2.2 - Concentration Assignment
1. A 0.750 L aqueous solution contains 90.0 g of ethanol, C,H5OH. Calculate the
molar concentration of the solution in mol L1.
2. What mass of Nacl are dissolved in 152 mL of a solution if the concentration
of the solution is 0.364 M?
3. How many grams of CaCl2 would be dissolved in 1.0L of a 0.10M solution of
CaCl,?
4. A mass of 98 8 of sulfuric acid is dissolved in water to prepare a 0.500 M
solution. What is the volume of the solution?
5. A solution of sodium carbonate, Na,CO3 contains 53.0 & of solute in 215 mL
of solution. What is its molarity?
10


---

### Page 11

## 4.2 - Concentration
6. What is the volume of a solution of 0.0400 M HNO3 that contains 12.6 8 of solute?
7. Calculate the concentration in ppb of 670.3 mg of chlorine mixed into a pool
containing 151 000 000 mL of water.
8. A sample of water contains 20.0 ppm of NaOH. What is the molarity?
9. What mass of dextrose, C6H1206 is dissolved in 325 mL of 0.258 M solution?
10. If you have 100.0 mL of a 30.0% aqueous solution of ethanol, what volumes of
ethanol and water are in the solution?
11


---

### Page 12

Attachments
Solution Concetration Handout.doc