

---

### Page 1

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
## 4.3 Dilutions and Ion Concentration
P8 445-450 in Heath
P8 467-468 in Matter and Change
r
## 1 mL
## 1 mL
## 1 mL
## 1 mL
Full
+9 mL
+9 mL
+9 mL
+9 mL
Strength
$DI$
$DI$
$DI$
$DI$
Wastewater
Water
Water
Water
Water
## 1.0 Concentration 0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001
Dilution 1/10
1/100
1/1000
1/10000
1


---

### Page 2

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
Dilution
In the lab, we use concentrated solutions of standard molarities (stock
solutions) to prepare a less concentrated solution by diluting the stock
solution with solvent.
If we had a salt water solution at a specific volume, we could dilute it
by adding more water.
Before Dilution
After Dilution
Initial Solution
Final Solution
M; = initial # of moles
$M = final # of moles$
initial volume
final volume
Notice that since we did not add any more solute, the number of
moles will not change. The volume changes, (increased the number of
solvent particles); thereby decreasing the concentration of the
solution.
Therefore, we get the following mathematical set up since the initial #
of moles equals the final # of moles:
$CVi=CV_2$
$OR$
$MIV_1= M_2V_2$
## 1 = initial
## 2 = final
Ex) What volume of concentrated (18.0 M) sulfuric acid (in mL), is
required to prepare 5.00 L of 0.150 M solution when diluted with
water?
2


---

### Page 3

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
Dilution
Examples from Heath Text p. 446-447
Example 16-1
If you have 500ml of a 0.4M NaCl solution, how much water is needed to
make a 0.1M solution?
Example 16-2
A chemist adds water to 120mL of a 6.0M solution of NaOH until the
final volume is 2.0L. What is the molarity of the resulting solution?
Example 16-4
What concentration results when 150mL of a 0.36 M solution of MgSO4 is
added to 750mL of water?
3


---

### Page 4

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
Serial Dilution
a process used to get a very dilute solution.
To perform a serial dilution, you take a stock solution and dilute it
to a known concentration. Take some volume of the new solution
and dilute it, and SO on.
Ex) During a serial dilution, you use 10.0 mL of a stock solution and
dilute it to 1.00 L three times. The 1.00 L stock solution contains
## 25.0 g of NaOH. What is the final concentration after the serial
dilution?
4


---

### Page 5

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
Concentration of Ions in a Solution
Often, we will come across solutions that involve ionic compounds and
acids.
These types of solutions are called electrolytic solutions because of their
ability to conduct electricity.
In a case like this, we will want to be able to calculate the concentration of
the ions, and not necessarily the concentration of the solution. We will neec
balanced equations to help us with this...
Recall dissociation: Na,03
2Na'ag) + CO3(ag)
The key to dissociation is to see the mole ratios for the ions. Therefore, the
concentration of the Na+ is double that of CO32-
The coefficients above will become useful in the following example.
Ex) If we have a 0.20 M solution of Na,CO3 what is the concentration for
each of the ions produced?
5


---

### Page 6

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
Concentration of Ions in a Solution
Examples from Heath Text p. 446-447
Example 16-5:
Find [Cr3+] and [SO42-] in a 0.020M solution of Cr2(SO4)3.
Example 16-6:
A saturated solution of PbCl2 is found to contain 9.9g of PbCl2 per litre of solution
Find [Pb2+] and [CI]
6


---

### Page 7

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
Mixing of Solutions
Often we mix two or more solutions, which increases the volume. The
concentration of the solutes are therefore reduced.
Examples from Heath Text p. 446-447
Example 16-7:
250mL of 0.30M K,SO4 and 250 mL of 0.80M MgCl are mixed and no reaction
results. What is the concentration of each of the substances in the final solution
and the concentration of each individual ion?
Example 16-8:
2.0L of 0.60M FeCl3 solution is mixed with 1.0L of 0.90M BaCl2 solution. No
reaction occurs. What is the concentration of each ion in the final solution?
7


---

### Page 8

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
## 2.3 - Dilutions and Ion Concentrations Assignment
1. An experiment requires 2.00 L of 0.200 M hydrochloric acid (HCI) solution.
What volume of concentrated hydrochloric acid, containing 11.9 M hydrogen
chloride, is needed?
2. A chemist adds water to 120 mL of a 6.0 M solution of NaOH until the final
volume is 2.0 L. What is the molarity of the resulting solution?
3. What concentration results when 150 mL of a 0.36 M solution of magnesium
sulfate, MgSO4, are added to enough water to give a final solution volume of
## 750 mL?
4. What concentration results when 150 mL of a 0.36 M solution of magnesium
sulfate, MgSO4, are added to 750 mL of water?
5. Describe how you would prepare 250.0 mL of a standard 1.00 M NaOH
solution.
8


---

### Page 9

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
6. Lithium hydroxide has a solubility of 0.355 M. Find the concentration of the
ions in the solution.
7. Iron(III) nitrate has a solubility of 0.15 M. Find concentration of the ions in
solution.
8. Calculate ion concentrations in a 2.00 L solution containing 17.1 g aluminum
sulfate, Al2(SO4)3
9. If 12.0 mL of a standard solution is diluted to 1.50 L twice during a serial
dilution, what is the final concentration? The 2.00 L standard solution contains
## 6.86 8 of HCI.
10. After performing a serial dilution 3 times you find the concentration of the
final Mg(NO3)2 solution is 1.30 X 10-5 M. If each serial dilution took 20.0 mL of a
previous solution and diluted it to 1.25 L, what was the mass of Mg(NO3)2 in the
standard solution?
9


---

### Page 10

## 4.3 - Dilutions and lon Concentration
11. Calculate the concentration of each ion in each of the following mixed
solutions in which no reaction occurs
a. 2.0L of 4.0M MgSO4 mixed with 2.0L of 0.80M KI
b. 3.0L of 0.48M NaOH mixed with 1.0L of 0.32M KOH
10


---

### Page 11

Attachments
Solution Concetration Handout.doc