

---

### Page 1

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
P8 457-461 in Matter and Change
It seems as
Why did
though the
my soda
warm
go flat?
temperature has
affected the
solubility of the
gases in the
soda!
Click here for Solubility of Salts


---

### Page 2

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
Parameters Affecting Solubility
Solubility: the max amount of solute that will dissolve in a given
amount of solvent at a specific temperature and pressure (usually
expressed in & solute/100g of solvent or & solute/100cmo solvent)
Temperature:
generally solid solubility increases as solubility increases (there are
exceptions such as NH3)
gas solubility decreases as temperature increases
if temperature decreases, excess solute will precipitate out
a supersaturated solution is capable of retaining the solute in its
dissolved form; these solutions are very unstable
Pressure and Gas:
solubility of a gas in any solvent increases as the external pressure
increases
the mass of a gaseous solute dissolved within a liquid is proportional
to the pressure upon the system (Henry's Law)
S1
S2
P1
P2
as pressure increases, the gas solubility increases proportionally.
ex: If 0.85 8 of a gas at 4.0 atm of pressure dissolves in 1.0L of water,
how much will dissolve in 1.0L of water at 1.0 atm at the same
temperature?


---

### Page 3

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
Solubility Curves (Table 11 and 12 in package)
A solubility curve is a graph that shows us what mass of a solute will
make a saturated solution in 100 g (or 100 mL) of water over a range of
temperatures.
A solubility graph can be used to answer a variety of questions:
1. To determine the solubility of specific compounds at given
temperatures.
Ex) How much KCIO3 will dissolve in water at 30° C? What about at
80° C?
2. To identify a substance when you are given the solubility
Ex) What substance has a solubility of 102 g/100 mL of water at 60° C?
3. To determine what temperature a substance has for a given solubility
Ex) At what temperature will sodium nitrate have a solubility of 95g/
100mL?
*These types of situations only work if the amount of water is
100mL..otherwise you need to set up a proportion:
Ex) What is the solubility of sodium chloride at 25 oC in 150mL of
water?


---

### Page 4

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
4. To determine amount of moles in a solution
Ex) How many moles of NaNO3 are in 1.00 L of water if the solution is
saturated at 25.0° C?
5. To determine if a solution is saturated, unsaturated or supersaturated
Values that are below the curge means the solution is unsaturate (more solute
can be dissolved). Likewise, values above the curve represent supersaturation
Ex) Describe the solution in terms of saturation for the following:
a) 70 8 of NaNO3 per 100 mL of HO at 30° C.
b) 60 8 of KCI per 100 mL of H,O at 80° C.
c) 80 & of KNO3 per 100 mL of H,0 at 50° C.
6. To determine amount of additional solute is needed to make a
saturated solution
Ex) 30 & of potassium nitrate has been added to 100 cm3 of water at 500C.
How many additional grams must be added to make it saturated?


---

### Page 5

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
Solubility Tables
A solubility table tells us whether or not an ionic compound will
DISSOCIATE in water at a specific temperature (usually 25.0° C).
To read the table (Table 10 in package), look at the left hand column. It gives
you a list of anions.
soluble - an ionic compound that will probably not form a precipitate in
water
low solubility - the ionic compound will probably form a precipitate in
water
For example, in the first row, it tells you that essentially all anions
matched up with an alkali cation (the first column in the periodic table)
will be soluble in water.
That is, Nacl and K3PO4 are two substances soluble in water.
In general, you need to find a specific ion from your formula on the chart
and see if the ion it is paired up with will produce a soluble substance.
Ex) is (NH4)2SO4 soluble in water?
Ex) is Pbl2 soluble in water?
Solubility of Common Compounds in' Water
Rule Negative) Ions
Positivel Ions
Solubility
essentially all
L*, Na*,K*, Rb*, Cs*, Fr*
soluble
## 2 essentially all
H*
soluble
## 3 essentially all
NH,*
soluble
## 4 nitrate, NO;
essentially all
soluble
5
Ag*
low solubility
acetate, CH,coo all others
soluble
## 6 bromide, Br
Ag*, Pb2+, Hg: Cu*, TI*
low solubility
chloride, CI
all others
soluble
iodide, r
7
Cat Sr+, Ba+, Ra+, Pb+, Ag*, Hgi low solubility
sulfate, so,-
all others
soluble
8
Li*, Na*, K*, Rb*, Cs*, Fr*, H*, NH,*. soluble
sulfide, s?-
Be't, Mg* Ca**, Sr+ Ba*, Ra+
all others
low solubility
## 9 hydroxide, OH
L+, Na*, K*, Rb*, Cs*, Fr*, H*, NH,*. soluble
St Bat Ra+ Tl+
all others
low solubility
## 10 carbonate, co,-
Li*, Na*, K*, Rb*, Cs*, Fr*, H*, NH,* soluble
phosphate, PO, all others
low solubilityl
sulfite, so,-


---

### Page 6

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and' Tables - Worksheet
1. Use a solubility curve to determine the solubility of the following compounds at the
temperatures given.
compound
temperature
solubility
$NH_3$
10°C
Cez(SO4)3
50°C
$KCI$
90°C
2. For each of the following solutions, classify the solution as unsaturated, saturated, or
supersaturated.
mass solute in
compound
temperature
solution
## 100 mL water
$NH_3$
90°C
10g
$NH_4CI$
80°C
70g
$NaNO_3$
30°C
80g
3. What is the solubility of ammonium chloride, NH4C1, at 100°C? Express this both as g/
100mL of water and as mol/L of water. Round your answer to the nearest molarity.
4. What mass of potassium chlorate, KCIO3 could be dissolved in 100mL of water at 70°C?


---

### Page 7

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables
5. A saturated solution of potassium chloride at 80.0 C is cooled to 40.0 oC. Initially, no solid was
present in thel beaker. Once cooled, there appeared to be solid at the bottom of the beaker. Explain the
difference in the presence of solid at the bottom of each solution assuming there is 100 8 of water. How
much solid (in grams) will there be once the solution has cooled.
6. Use a Table of Solubility of Common Compounds to predict whether or not the following
compounds willl be solublei in water at 25°C.
Mg(NO3)2
$CaSO_4$
$CaCl$
$K_2SO_4$
$AlS_3$
Ba(OH),
(NH4);PO4
Mg(OH),
SrCO;
Bes
BasO4
$CuCl$
Mg(CH,COO),
$CuCl$
Srlz
$H_2CO_3$
7.A glass of cold cola is left to stand 5 minutes at room temperature. How does temperature affect the
solubility of the CO2(g)?
8. At room temperature, the solubility of which solute in water would most be affected by a change in
pressure? Explain your answer.
a. methanol @)
b. sugar (s)
C. carbon dioxide (g)
d. sodium nitrate (s)
9. Calculate the solubility of oxygen gas in water at 0°C and a pressure of 3.00 atm. The solubility of
oxygen is 0.348 g/100 mL water at 0 C and 1.00 atm.