

---

### Page 1

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables ANSWER KEY
## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables - Worksheet KEY
1. Use a solubility curve to determine the solubility of the following compounds at the
temperatures given.
compound
temperature
solubility
$NH_3$
10°C
68g/100mL
Cez(SO4)3
50°C
6g/100mL
$KCI$
90°C
53g/100mL
2. For each of the following solutions, classify the solution as unsaturated, saturated, or
supersaturated.
mass solute in
compound
temperature
solution
## 100 mL water
$NH_3$
90°C
10g
saturated
$NH_4CI$
80°C
70g
supersaturated
$NaNO_3$
30°C
80g
unsaturated
3. What is the solubility of ammonium chloride, NH4CI, at 100°C? Express this both as g/
100mL of water and as mol/L of water. Round your answer to the nearest molarity.
from graph: 75g/100mL
75g X 1000n 1 mol = 14
X
M
100rk
1L
53.59
4. What mass of potassium chlorate, KCIO3 could be dissolved in 100mL of water at 70°C?
from graph: approximately 32 g


---

### Page 2

## 4.4 - Solubility Curves and Tables ANSWER KEY
5. A saturated solution of potassium chloride at 80.0 C is cooled to 40.0 oC. Initially, no solid was
present in the beaker. Once cooled, there appeared to be solid at thel bottom of the beaker. Explain the
difference in the presence of solid at the bottom of each solution assuming there is 100 g of water. How
much solid (in grams) will there be once the solution has cooled.
Saturated at 800C means there is about 50g of solid dissociated in the solution. As the
solution cools, the solubility of KCI goes down, which means all of the excess solute will
be removed from solution and become a solid (the solubility of KCI at 400C is only
about 37g). Therefore, about 13g of KCI will be found at the bottom of the beaker
$(50-37 = 13g).$
6. Use a Table of Solubility of Common Compounds to predict whether or not the following
compounds will be soluble in water at 25°C.
Mg(NO3)2
soluble
$CaSO_4$
insoluble
CaClz
soluble
K,SO4
soluble
$AlS_3$
insoluble Ba(OH),
soluble
(NH4);PO4
soluble
Mg(OH),
insoluble
$SrCO_3$
insoluble Bes
soluble
$BaSO_4$
insoluble CuClz
soluble ?
Cu+ VS. Cu2+
Mg(CH3COO), soluble
$CuCl$
insoluble
Srlz
soluble
$HCO_3$
soluble
7. A glass of cold cola is left to stand 5 minutes at room temperature. How does temperature affect the
solubility of the CO2(g)?
Being that carbon dioxide is a gas, an increase in temperature decreases the
solubility of carbon dioxide.
8. Ati room temperature, the solubility of which solute in water would most be affected by a change in
pressure? Explain your answer.
a. methanol ()
b. sugar ()
Carbon dioxide is the only gas; therefore the answer is C. Only gas
C. carbon dioxide (g
solubility is affected by pressure changes (see Henry's Law).
d. sodium nitrate (s)
9. Calculate the solubility of oxygen gas in water at 0 C and a pressure of 3.00 atm. The solubility of
Oxygen is 0.348 g/100: mL water at 0 C and 1.00 atm.
S1
S2
0.348g/100mL
S2
$S_2 = 1.04 g/100mL$
P1
P2
## 1.00 atm
## 3.00 atm