

---

### Page 1

4.5
Precipitate Reactions and Selectivel Precipitation Assignment
Part A: Net Ionicl Equations
Writet the balanced and net-ionic equation. for the following doublei replacement reactions.
Notei that all reactants are aqueous. All statest must be shown. Ifar reaction does not occur
you musti indicate that and labalanced equationi is not necessary.
1) Potassium phosphate and caicium nitrate.
+
- GKND,
ul
QK,P0414)
3qNOskrp
3144)
3Ca2 + 2P043 - Ca,(PO421s)
(4)
2) Barium chloride and sodiums sulfate.
+
- BaS04i9 +2Naclao
Baclzuy No,SOglp
Balep + SO4es) -1 Bas SO4cs)
3) Sodium acetate and silver nitrate.
NaCHCoorsp + Ag NDyep - NoNDge) AgCH,co0i
+ CH3cooces) - AgCH3cODi
Agiep
4) Hydrochloric açid and copper (II) nitrate
2HCkay) + Cu(NOLeD QHN9LD Cuclzlep
$MR$
5) Calciumi iodide and potassiumo carbonate.
Calzies) + K,COgag - Cacos + QKIAg
Cant t
(02) COSep 7Cac031)
2


---

### Page 2

Part B Selectivel Precipitation
1. An aqueous solution containing the following cations: Ca* Ag Cu2* K
In order tos separate them, the following solutions are available: Na,5 Na,CO, NaBr
Ifwe wish to separate the cations by causing only one cation toj precipitate out of solution at at time:
a) in what order should the solutionsl Na,S, Na,COy and NaBr be added?
b) identify the threep precipitates that form after the addition oft thoses sslations.
b)
c) which one cation, will remain ins solution?,
$CI$
2+ Ag+ Cu? <
MaBr- AgBris,
Ca
2- Sol PPT PPT Sol (3 Na,S CuSts)
co3- PPT PPT PPT Sol ONa,C0, CaCPgisy
Br Sbl PPT Sol 561)K theonly ion
left
SORAtion
2. We wish to separate the cations from ai mixtured containing the following ain
Ra(NO, Mg(NOl and AgNO;
In ordert to do so we are given the following separates solutions: K,SO. K,S, and KOH
In what orders should we add the separate solutionsi in ordert tos removet the cations by selective
precipitation? List the precipitates that form, in the proper order.
a)
b)
Ra2+ M2+ Aq'
$OKaS$
## 7 Aga S(s
## 504 PPT Sol PPT
$QKOH$
2
b6 C
Mg(oH)2(s
S2-
Sol Sol PPT Cah
3) KaS04-7 RasO4(s)
OH- Sol PPT PPT
3. You want tos separatet the followings cations from a. solution: Be*, Sr2,and. Ag. Ifyou are given
NH,Br, Na,SO, and H,SO. list the order the substances must bea added and the precipitates that form
in each step.
b)
2+ Sr 2+
G)
pe
$AS$
$ONH_4Br$
AgBris)
B--
Spl
Sol
$PPT$
H,S0y - SrSO4(s)
SO-- PPI
$PPT$
$PPT$
3
)
Na,5037
Sol
Besly9
S04
PPT PPT
4. An aqueous solution contains ar mixture ofl Ba2*, Pb2 and Ca2. List3 substances that can be addedi in
the correct order such that1 1 cation will precipitate out ata time. List thej precipitate that formsi in each
step.
$WDI$
P52r C42+
order
prcip
B*
-
Sol 0 NaBr - PbBr2is)
Sol
$OrIRES$
Br
$PPT$
$PPT$
ogb
0
S042
PPT PPT @ NoOH - Ca(oH)2o
05
yege OH Sol PPT PPT
## 0 N,Soy -
BaSOs)
3