

---

### Page 1

## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
Pg 458-464 in Health
P8 292-294 in Matter and Change
- Lead Nitrate and Potassium Iodide are
ionic solids that are soluble in water.
- If a solution of Pb(NO3)2 and a solution
of KI are combined, bright yellow crystals
form and will eventually # settle out" on
the bottom.(Water is not a reactant, but a
medium for solvating individual ions, thus
does not appear in the chemical equation).
Pb(NO,)zten) + 2Klan) 1 Pbl, + 2KNO,
Use the solubility table to decide which of the products will form a solid
and which will be aqueous and the write a net ionic equation to show.
Pbl, : has low solubility in water sO will likely form a precipitate
KNO; : is soluble in water sO will not form a solid
- Showing the actual nature of the reactants and product ions
involved in a reaction would be a more accurate representation.
- The reaction above could be rewritten as:
Pb 2+ (a) + 2(NO;) (ag) + 2K* (ag) + 21 (ag) - Pblzs) + 2K* (ag) + 2NO, (ag)
- The ions K+ (aq) and NO3( (aq) remain unchanged in the reaction; they
are called spectator ions. To simplify the reaction representation,
spectator ions may be deleted from the ionic equation.
- The resultant representation is called the net ionic equation and it
only shows the reacting species.
1


---

### Page 2

## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
A precipitate is a solid that forms when two aqueous solutions are
mixed together.
They result because the compound formed is insoluble in water.
In general, precipitates form during a double replacement reaction.
In a double replacement reaction, the reactants will both be
aqueous.
A reaction will only take place if at least one of the products is a
solid (a precipitate).
A solubility table will be needed to check the solubility of each
product.
If a precipitate is formed, we are only interested in the ions in the
reactants that form the precipitants.
The chemical equation showing only the ions that make up the
precipitate is called a net ionic equation.
Ex) If aqueous zinc bromide and aqueous silver nitrate are mixed
together, does a reaction take place? Write the net ionic equation if
there is a reaction.
2


---

### Page 3

## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
If no precipitate forms, then no reaction actually takes place because all the
ions remain in the solution.
In this case, all the ions would be considered spectators.
Ex) Write a balanced equation for the following reactants. Then, write
the net ionic equation. Identify all spectator ions.
a) copper (II) sulfate and sodium hydroxide
b) magnesium bromide and sulfuric acid
3


---

### Page 4

## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
Selective precipitation (or qualitative analysis) is a method we can use to
separate mixtures of ions one at a time from a mixture containing many
soluble substances.
For example, imagine we mixed Ba(NO3)2, and Pb(NO3)2 together in a
beaker.
Since any cation bonded to NO3 makes a soluble substance, NO3 would
be considered a spectator ion when we mix these two substances together
(thus, we no longer need to consider them).
Ignoring the NO3 we basically have a beaker full of Ba2+ and Pb2+
What we want to do now, is add aqueous solutions that will form a
precipitate with each of the cations above one at a time.
When a precipitate is formed, we can filter it out of the solution because it
is solid. The original beaker now has one less ion in it. This process is
continued until no ions are left.
Pb2+ forms an insoluble precipitate with Cl, Br and I-but Ba2+ does not;
thus we can use substances like NaBr, Nac1, and Nal to cause the Pb2+
ions in our beaker drop out of it. Since the Nat ions are soluble with
everything, it too is a spectator ion. The precipitate can then be filtered
off.
Ba2+ ions can be precipitated by adding sulfate (Na,SO4), phosphate (Nas
(PO4)2), carbonate(Na,Co.) or sulfite ions(Na,SOs).
glass stirring rod
supernatant
precipitate
Therefore, we are
basically adding anions
one at a time to make
precipitates with the
cations in the beaker.
4


---

### Page 5

## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
Ex 2) imagine we mixed Sr(NO3)2, Cu(NO3)2 and Mg(NO3)2 together
in a beaker.
We can use three substances like Na 2S, Na,SO4, and NaoH one at a
time to make specific cations in our beaker drop out of it.
Since the Nat ions are soluble with everything, it too is a spectator
ion. Therefore, we are basically adding anions one at a time to make
precipitates with the cations in the beaker.
The order that we add the sodium compounds is crucial because the
anions may be insoluble with more than one of the cations in the
beaker.
We can use a chart like the following to help us determine the correct
order.
Sr2+ Cu2+ Mg2+
S2-
SO42-
$OH$
In each box, fill in ppt if the two will form a precipitate and fill in sol if
they will be soluble.
Once this chart is filled out it will be easy to determine the order, as well
as each precipitate that will form.
So, what is the correct order of the substances, and what precipitate will
form for each step?
5


---

### Page 6

## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
## 2.5 - Precipitate: Reactions: and Selective Precipitation Assignment
Part A: Net Ionic Equations
Write the balanced and net-ionic equation for the following double replacement reactions.
Notet that all reactants are aqueous. All states must be shown. Ifar reaction does not occur
you must indicatei that and al balanced equation is not necessary.
1) Potassium phosphate and calcium nitrate.
2) Barium chloride and sodium sulfate.
3) Sodium acetate and silver nitrate.
4) Hydrochloric acid and copper (II) nitrate
5) Calciumi iodidea and potassium carbonate.
6


---

### Page 7

## 4.5 - Precipitate Reactions and Selective Precipitation
Part B Selective Precipitation
1. An aqueous solution containing the following cations: Ca2+ Ag+ Cu2+ K+
In ordert tos separate them, the following solutions are available: Na,S Na:CO3 NaBr
If we wish to separate the cations by causing only one cation to precipitate out of solution at a time:
a) in what order should the solutionsl Na,S, Na,CO3, and NaBr be added?
b) identify the threej precipitates that form after the addition of thoses solutions.
c) which one cation will remaini in solution?
2. We wish to separate the cations from ai mixture containing the following solutions:
Ra(NOs)2 Mg(NO3)2, and AgNO;
In order to do sO we are given the following separate solutions: K2SO4, K,S, and KOH
In what order should we add the separate solutionsi in order tor remove the cations by selective
precipitation? List the precipitates that form, in the proper order.
3. You want to separate the followings cations from a solution: Be2*, Sr2+, and Ag*. If you are given
NH,Br, Na,SO3, and HSO. list the order thes substances must be added and the precipitates that form
in each step.
4. Choose your own Solutions!
An aqueous solution contains ai mixture of Ba2+, Pb2+ and Ca2+. List 3 substances that can be added in
the correct orders such that 1 cation will precipitate out at at time. List the precipitate that forms in each
step.
7