

---

### Page 1

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
1
V -
I
5.3-ICE Box Problems


---

### Page 2

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
As we already know, a chemical equation tells us several pieces of
information.
H2 + I  2HI
This equation tells us how the number of molecules or moles of each
substance relate to each other by looking at the balancing coefficients.
The balancing coefficients also tell us how the concentration of each
substance changes as a reaction goes on.
For example, if [H,] changes by X mols/L, then [I,] changes by X mols/L,
and [HI] changes by 2x mols/L.
However, [H,] and [L] are decreasing while [HI] is increasing. Thus, we
say that A[H,] = A[I] = -X, and the A[HI] = 2x.
Note that the negatives mean decrease (or losing) and a positive value
means gaining.
This knowledge of changing concentrations is key for an ICE box
problem. The ICE is an acronym for:
I - Initial concentration
C - Change in concentration
E - Equilibrium concentration
An ICE box problem deals with initial conçentrations not at equilibrium.
Time passes, and equilibrium is eventually reached with new
concentrations kept in check by the equilibrium constant.
You can use an ICE box in any problem where you know some, but not all,
equilibrium concentrations


---

### Page 3

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
The following process can be used to solve an ICE box problem for a
general reaction: A + B  C
1. Balance the equation.
2. Set up the ICE box:
$AJ$
[B]
C
[Initial)
[Change]
[Equilibrium)
3. Use information. from the question to plug values into the ICE box.
It is the bottom row that we really want to use; the other rows in the
table just help get us there
Some hints you may want to consider:
i. Initially, you should have no product for the forward reaction.
ii. Balanced coefficients (mole to mole ratios) can help you
determine unknown values in the "C" column.
$iii. E=I-C$
Ex) Ammonia is created by the following process:
Nzg + 3Hzg  2 NH3
If the initially [N] = 0.96 M and [H,] = 0.72 M, and at equilibrium
[NH,] = 0.24 M what is the equilibrium constant?
[Inial)
[Change]
[Equilibrium]


---

### Page 4

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
iii. If Keq is known, but you do not know [product] then let one of the
changes in equilibrium equal X to solve for the missing
concentrations at equilibrium.
Ex) Initially, for the reaction below, [H 21 = [] = 0.200 M.
Hzig) + l2tg)  2HIg)
Calculate all three equilibrium concentrations if K eq - 64.0.
[Inial]
[Change]
[Equilibrium)


---

### Page 5

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
This situation may involve the quadratic formula if you come across a
quadratic equation of the for ax 2+ bx + C:
-DtVb2-4ac
$X =$
2a
Ex) Given this equation,
PCI3g + Clzg  PCI)
Calculate all three equilibrium concentrations if initially
[PCI] = 1.00 M and Keq = 16.0.
[Inial]
[Change]
[Equilibrium]


---

### Page 6

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems - Assignment
1. For the reaction
N2lg) + 3H2(g)  2NH3(g)
The initial [N2] = 0.32 M and the initial [Hz] = 0.66 M. At a certain temperature
and pressure the equilibrium [H2] is found to be 0.30 M. What is Keq under these
circumstances?
[Initial)
[Change]
[Equilibrium]
2. Suppose that 2.00 moles of HC1 in a 1.00L glass flask slowly decomposes into H2
and Cl2. When equilibrium is reached, the concentrations of H2 and C12 are both
## 0.214 M. What is the Keg?
[Initial)
[Change]
[Equilibrium)


---

### Page 7

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
3. Consider the equilibrium: 2N,O(g) + 0,(8)  4NO(g)
## 3.00 moles of NO(g) are introduced into a 1.00-Liter evacuated flask. When the
system comes to equilibrium, 1.00 mole of N,O(g) has formed. Determine the
equilibrium concentrations of each substance. Calculate the K for the reaction
based on these data.
[Initial)
[Change]
[Equilibrium]
4. Ats some temperature Keg = 33 for the reactionH, + I2 * 2HI. If initially, [H,]=
.0600Mand [Iz] =. .0300 M, whatareall three gullrimcoentatons,
[Initial)
[Change]
[Equilibrium)


---

### Page 8

## 5.3 - ICE Box Problems
5. Graphite (solid carbon) and carbon dioxide arel kept at constant pressure at 1000
K until the following reaction reaches equilibrium.
Ci) + CORg)  2COlg)
If Keg = 0.021, calculate the equilibrium concentration of CO if the concentration
of CO2 was initially 0.012 M.
[Initial)
[Change)
[Equilibrium)