

---

### Page 1

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
pages 545-553 in Health
A<
Aelog
Special
Table 13 in resource package


---

### Page 2

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
Since saturated solutions are equilibrium systems, we can apply the
equilibrium constant expression to solutions.
Since a solution is a special kind of equilibrium, we will be dealing with a
special kind of equilibrium constant, denoted K sp* The sp stands for
solubility product.
Recall that in a solution, we often deal with aqueous ions. Therefore,
dissociation will need to be used.
For example, consider a saturated silver sulfate solution:
Ag,SO46s) 2 2Ag* (aq) + SO,(g)
Since solids and liquids are not involved in an K eq calculation,
$Keq = [Ag+12 [SO_42-]$
This equation only contains the products of a solution. Therefore, it is a
special equilibrium constant that shows up a lot in chemistry.
$Ksp = [Ag+12 [SO_42-]$
Note that we must include the charges on the ions in this expression. Ag
is different from Ag*. .
Note that unless otherwise indicated, K sp calculations will always involve
dissolving a solid to produce aqueous ions.
Also note that if you compare two K sp 's together, the larger one will
indicate a more soluble salt since the products will be favored. Therefore,
a smaller Ksp indicates a less soluble salt because the reactants will be
favored.
Ex) Write the solubility product constant expression for Ca (PO4)2.


---

### Page 3

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
Ex) The concentration of lead ions in a saturated solution of PbI 2 at
25'C is 1.3 X 10-3 M. What is the solubility product constant?
Ex) The Ksp for MgCO3 at 25'C is 2.0 X 10-8. What are the ion
concentrations in a saturated solution at this temperature?
Ex) Calculate the solubility for silver chromate in a saturated solution
at 25'C. Ksp = 1.1 X 10-12.


---

### Page 4

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
Recall from Unit 4 that thesolubility of a substance is themaximum concentration a substance can
have in water to make a saturated solution.
Even 'insoluble' substances will dissolve slightly. However, the amount that actually dissolves
has such a small concentration that we: say that the substance: is insoluble (less than 0.1M).
Also recall that we. learned how to use: a solubility table to determine whether or not a precipitate
would form during a double displacement: reaction. When doing those predictions, we assumed
that the concentration of the 'insoluble' substance was great enough that it would accumulate at
the bottom of the solution.
However, we could run into a situation where this' 'insoluble' substance forms in such a small
amount that the water is able to hold it. Therefore, no solid would form.
Remember that equilibrium systems involving solutions are saturated.
Therefore, Ksp values are related to saturated solutions. If a solution is
unsaturated then more substance can dissolve. If a solution is
supersaturated then a solid should form at the bottom of the solution.
So, when we are trying to determine whether or not a precipitate will form when two ions meet
each other, we: need to determine the level of saturation. We can do this by comparing a trial Ksp
to the actual Ksp-
The trial Ksp can be denoted as Q.
canl be thought of as 'what we have' and Ksp is 'what we need for saturation'.
There are three situations that can happen when we compare Q to Kspi
1.Q< Ksp
This means that' 'what we. have' is less than 'what we: need'. Therefore, this represents an
unsaturated solution and no precipitate will form.
$2.Q=1 Ksp$
This means' 'what we. have' is equal to 'what we need'. Therefore, this represents a saturated
solution and no precipitate will form.
3.Q> Ksp
This means' 'what we. have' is more than 'what we: need'. Therefore, this represents a
supersaturated solution and aj precipitate willform.
Saturated Solutions
unsaturated
solution

mores solute
dissolves
90
00
0
supersaturated
saturated
solution
solution
added crystals
noi mores solute
grow
dissolves


---

### Page 5

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
What if I mix two substances together?... they dilute each other.
This dilution must be considered when deciding on whether a precipitate will form (remember
determining ion concentration from Unit 4...)
Steps:
1. Decide if any possible precipitates can form from the two substances
being mixed using a solubility table.
Write the net ionic equation for this substance to determine what the trial Ksp expression is.
2. Calculate the dilution of both substances present. Note that the final volume will be the sum of
the volumes of both substances (M,VA=M,V2).
Then, calculate the concentrations of the ions that make up your possible precipitate.
3. Using the concentrations of the ions above, calculate the trial K sp and compare it to the actual K
Ex) 25.0 mL of 0.00200 M of potassium chromate are mixed with 75.0 mL
of 0.000125 M of lead (II) nitrate. Will a precipitate form if K sp of lead (II) chromate is 1.8 X 10 -14?


---

### Page 6

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
Ex) If 25.0 mL of 4.50 X 10-3 M Pb(NO3)2 is mixed with 35.0 mL of
## 2.80 X 10-3 M Mglz, will a precipitate form?


---

### Page 7

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
-We can also use the Ksp to determine the maximum concentration
of an ion which can exist in solution with another ion without
precipitation
Ex) Water hardness is caused by the presence of Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions.
One way of removing these ions is to add washing soda (sodium
carbonate Na,CO3) which causes the precipitation of CaCO3 and
MgCO3. If 5.0L of water has [Ca2+] of 0.0040M, calculate the maximum
mass of Na,CO3 which can be added without causing any precipitate
to form. Ksp for CaCO3 = 4.8 X 10-9


---

### Page 8

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
## 5.4 - Special K's Equilibrium Solubility Assignment
1. Writet the balanced equation and the solubility product constant expression, Kpi for the each of
thei following dissociationi reactions.. All compounds are: solids. One has been given as an example.
Reminders - ion charges MUST BE: included.
solids (and liquids) are. NOT included in the equilibrium expression
- don'tforget toi include exponents when needed
- polyatomici ions (e.g. COs) do not break apart
Compound
Equation
Kp
(NH4)2S
(NH4)20 (s) 21 NH4 *(ag) + S-(ag)
$Kp = [NH_41[S_2$
Cas
$KSO_4$
Mg(OH)2
2. Organize thei following salts in order of solubility (highest tol lowest):
AgCl; Ksp=1.8x1 10-10 Agl; Ksp = 8.5: x 10-17 AgBr; Kp=5.4x1013
3. Calculatel Ksp for as saturated nickel(II) sulfide, Nis, solution with a solubility of 3.27 x1 10-11.
Calculate the Kp-
4. Calculate the concentration ofi ions in a saturated solution of CaCO, in water at 25째C. Kp for CacO,
is 4.8> x 109.


---

### Page 9

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
5. Calculate the concentrations of ions at 25째C: for a saturated solution of silver bromate (Ksp -
5.3x1 105).
6. At 25째C, 0.0024 g of Ce(OH)3 is contained in a 2.5 Lsolution. Calculatel Ksp.
7. Whati is the: mass of calcium fluoride] presenti in a saturated 1.5 L: solution?
8. 400.01 mL of 4.00: x1 10-10 M AI(NO3)3 is mixed with 500.01 mL of 3.00 x 10-7 M NaOH. If Kp for
AI(OH)3 is 5.00: x 1033 at this temperature, will therel be a precipitate?


---

### Page 10

## 5.4 - Special K's - Solubility Equilibrium
9. Will aj precipitate form if 20.0 mL of 0.01001 M CaClz are mixed with 20.0: mL of 0.00800 M Na,SO4
at 25.0
10. Will aj precipitate form if 25 mL of 4.0: x 103 M AgNO3 are: mixed with 75 mL of 2.0 x 104 M
Na,CrO4 at 25.0째C?
11. Whati is the maximum [Sr2+] that can be dissolved in a 0.020 M solution of K,SO4 without
precipitating SrSO4? (Kp of SrSO4 = 7.6 x 10-7)