

---

### Page 1

Name:
School:
Unit 5 Hand In Assignment #2
This assignment covers sections 5.4 and 5.5
For all Ksp calculations, the dissociation equation with states and charges must be shown. You do not
have to show calculations to find the concentrations ofi ions; however, you may want to.
1. Write the dissociation equation and the solubility product expression for the following:
a) LiBris) (2 marks)
b) Magnesium Phosphate (2 marks)
2. At a certain temperature a saturated solution of BaF2 has a concentration of
## 4.59 x 10-2 M. What is the Ksp for BaF2 at this temperature? (3 marks)
3. What is the concentration of the ions present in a saturated Cd(OH)2 solution?
Ksp = 5.3 X 10-15. (4 marks)


---

### Page 2

Name:
School:
4. What mass of Cul is present in a 1.2 L saturated solution at 25°C? Ksp = 1.3 x10-12 (5
marks)
5. Will a precipitate form when 125 mL of 4.0 X 10-2 M of CaCl2 is added to 175 mL of
## 2.9 x 10-2 M of NaOH? Ksp of Ca(OH)2 = 4.8 X 10-6. Show the dissociation equation for
the possible precipitate and all formulas. (10 marks)


---

### Page 3

Name:
School:
6. The pressure on each of the following systems is increased by decreasing the volume of
the container. Explain whether each system would shift left, right, or stay the same.
a. 2SO2+02g  2S03G (g) (1 mark)
b. H2(g) + I2(g)  2 HIg) (1 mark)
C. CaCO3(s)  CaO() + CO2(g) (1 mark)
d. AgCls)  Agl+(ag) + Cl-(ag) (1 mark)
7. How could you alter the following to make the equilibrium below shift to the left:
2CO(g) + Ozg) 1 2CO2g) + 566 kJ
a) [CO] (1 mark)
b) pressure(1 mark)
c) temperature(l mark)


---

### Page 4

Name:
School:
8. Given the following equilibrium reaction:
2C) + O2(g)  2 CO(g)
what will be the effect of the following disturbances to the system? That is, will it shift to the
left or the right? Also mention the effect on the other participants in the reaction for a, b, and C.
a. adding CO (2 marks)
b. addition of O2(2 marks)
C. addition of Cis) (2 marks)
9. Use Le Châtelier's Principle to predict how the changes listed will affect the following
equilibrium reaction:
## 2 HI(g) + 9.4 kJ  H2 (g) + I2 g)
a. Will the concentration of HI increase, decrease, or remain the same if more H2 is
added? (1 mark)
b. What is the effect on the concentration of HI if the pressure of the system is increased? (1
mark)
C. What is the effect on the concentration of HI if the temperature of the system is increased?
(1 mark)
d. What is the effect on the concentration of HI if a catalyst is added to the system? (1 mark)
e. Write the equilibrium constant expression for this reaction. (1 mark)


---

### Page 5

Name:
School:
10. Changing the volume of the system alters the equilibrium position of this equilibrium:
N2() + 3Hzig) 2NH, 3(g)
But a similar change has no effect on this equilibrium:
Hzig) + Cl2(g) 2HCIg)
Explain. (2 marks)