

---

### Page 1

1)FACTORS THAT CHANGE EQUILIBRIUM: CONCENTRATION
We know that changing the concentration will also change an equilibrium.
Here 's Why:
The rate of any chemical reaction actually depends on a factor called the activity ofthe reacting
chemicals. In reasonably dilute solutions the activity is equal to the concentration. In other
words, the rate depends on the concentration ofthe reacting chemicals. The reaction rate
depends on the concentration oft the reacting chemicals because, with a higher concentration,
there will be more collisions. It also depends on a reaction rate constant, and SO can be
represented by the equation:
$rate = ksubstance)$
In an equilibrium we have two proçesses going on at the same time:
$rate, = k/R]$
$rate, = k,IP]$
where rater is the rate in the forward, and rate, the rate in the reverse directions. At equilibrium
we know that rater = rate, since the forward and reverse rates are equal at equilibrium.
What would happen to our reaction at equilibrium if we were to increase the cocentration of the
reactants, R? We would expect the forward rate to increase. So, for a while at least, the rate
would. go faster in the forward direction. This is no longer an equilibrium, since the rates aren't
equal any longer. Of course as the reaction goes forward faster it will make more products, P.
More P will increase the rate in the reverse direction. Eventually, we'll reach an equilibrium,
but it won't be the same one we started with. Similarly, if we increase the concentration ofP,
then the reaction would initially go faster in the reverse direction. Again though, it would
eventually reach a new equilibrium with equal rates.
So, IN GENERAL, WE EXPECT. A CHANGE IN CONCENTRATION TO HAVE AN EFFECT ON
EQUILIBRIUM.
2)FACTORS THAT CHANGE EQUILIBRIUM: TEMPERATURE
We know that changing temperature will change an equilibrium.
Here 's Why:
The rate ofa chemical reaction depends on the temperature. In order for molecules to react they
must collide, and the kinetic energy of the collision must be great enough to change the
molecule's potential energy and allow the atoms to rearrange into new substances. The potential
energy holding the atoms to each other in the original molecule is a potential energy barrier to
change and is called the activation energy. The reaction rate depends on the temperature
because, with a higher temperature, more molecules will be traveling faster. More will have
enough kinetic energy to make it over the activation energy barrier as they collide. Notice
however that as shown in the diagram below, the activation energy in the forward and reverse
directions are not the same. Because oft this, the reaction rate in the forward and reverse
directions will not be affected equally by changing temperature.


---

### Page 2

Ea forward
Ea reverse
Graph:


Reaction Coordinate
When the activation energy in the forward direction is larger (as shown here for an endothermic
reaction), an increase in temperature will make the forward reaction increase more rapidly than
the reverse. So, for a while, the rate. will go faster in the forward direction. This is no longer an
equilibrium, since the rates aren't equal any longer. Of course, as the reaction goes forward
faster it make more products, P. More P will increase the rate in the reverse direction.
Eventually, we'll get back to an equilibrium, but it won't be the same one as we started with.
Temperature change has caused a change to a new equilibrium.
Exactly the opposite would happen if the reaction was exothermic, sO that the activation energy
in the reverse direction would be greater. A change in temperature would result in the rate
initially going faster in the reverse direction until enough products had decomposed that the rate
would slow down to the point where the forward and reverse rates were once again equal. This
would once again be a new equilibrium.
So, IN GENERAL, WE EXPECT A CHANGE IN TEMPERATURE TO HAVE AN EFFECT ON AN
EQUILIBRIUM.
3) FACTORS THAT CHANGE EQUILIBRIUM: GAS PRESSURE
The effect of pressure on solids and liquids is SO small that we will ignore it. However, there is a
very real and important effect when we increase the pressure of reactions that contain gases:
Here's why:
It is very important to clear up some confusion that students have about gas phase reactions.
Although we write a chemical equation with two sides the reactants and the products in
reality when the reaction is carried out, both reactants and products will invariably in a single
container. This means that it is inappropriate to speak of"increasing the pressure on the
products (or reactants)".
In fact, when we refer to changing the pressure in a reaction, it is usually referring to the
pressure change caused by changing the volume ofthe reaction container. Changing the volume
doesn't change the number of particles in a container directly, but it does mean that the number
in each unit of volume will be different. Therefore, it changes the pressure.
When the volume increases, there are less molecules per unit volume. This means the number
of çollisions per unit of surface area decreases, SO the pressure is lower.
When the volume decreases, there are more molecules per unit volume. This means the number
of collisions per unit of surface area increases, SO the pressure is higher.


---

### Page 3

Effectively, increasing the pressure by decreasing the volume increases the concentration.
Remember though that is increases the concentration of everything that is in the gas phase, both
reactants and products.
We already know that changing the concentration has an effect on an equilibrium, and SO we
would expect it to do SO here. However, we have changed both reactant and product molecule
concentrations, SO we need to be cautious. Consider this reaction:
2NO, (g)
N,04(g)
## 2 gas molecules
## 1 gas molecule
There are two molecules of gaseous reactants, but only 1 molecule of gaseous produts.
Therefore, we expect the effect of an increase in concentration to have a greater effect on the
forward reaction. An unbalanced effect on the reaction rate will effect the equilibrium. We
would expect this reaction to change with a change in pressure. But look at this reaction:
H2 (g) + 1(g)
2HI (g)
## 2 gas molecules
## 2 gas molecules
Here there are two gaseous reactant molecules, but also two gaseous product molecules. The
rate of the forward reaction should increase if the pressure increased, but there should be just as
great an effect on the reverse reaction. Ifboth rates are effected equally, then the equilibrium is
not shifted. Remember that this is like running one step forward, and running one step back, as
compared to walking one step forward, and walking one step back. Your actual rate is different
in the two cases, but the net result is exactly the same you remain at a standstill.
In reactions where the number of gaseous reactant molecules are the same as the gasious product
molecules, changing pressure should have no effect on the equilibrium. The above shows us
what to expect if we changed the pressure by changing the volume. There are two other ways to
change the pressure of gases:
change the temperature (since temperature effects other reactions as well)
add an inert gas (overall pressure is increased - more molecules per unit volume
SO the total number of collisions increases, sO the total pressure increases, the
concentration of the original molecules is no different than it was before). Since
the inert gas does not change the concentration of reactant and product molecules,
it will not effect the rate, so it should have no effect on the equilibrium.
IN GENERAL, WE EXPECT PRESSURE TO HAVE. AN EFFECT ON AN EQUILIBRIUM WHEN THERE
ARE: DIFFERENTI NUMBERS OFI MOLECULES OF GAS IN THE PRODUCTS AND REACTANTS. WHEN
THE NUMBER OF GAS MOLECULES IN THE PRODUCTS AND REACTANTS ARE IDENTICAL,
PRESSURE WILL NOT HAVE. ANY EFFECT. AN INERT GAS WILL HAVE NO EFFECT ON THE
EQUILIBRIUM.
4) FACTORS THAT CHANGE EQUILIBRIUM: CATALYSTS
A catalyst has no effect on the final equilibrium condition. Ifa catalyst exists, then it will cause
the reaction to reach an equilibrium more quickly, but the final position reached is the same
with, or without the catalyst.
Here 's why:
An equilibrium must react in both the forward and reverse directions. There is an activation
energy barrier for each of these two reactions - a forward and activation energy and a reverse


---

### Page 4

activation energy. The higher this activation energy barrier, the slower the reaction rate.
A catalyst creates a new reaction pathway, with different reaction steps, with a lower activation
energy. Notice though that as shown in the diagram below, the effect on the activation
in
the forwardand reverse direction is exactly the same. Because of this, the reaction rates energy in the
forward and reverse directions will be affected equally.
Graph:
Uncatalyzed reaction
atalyzes a
Ea forward
Ea reverse
Loyes
joweN
Ea
Eq
5
L
I
P
R
The reaction will go faster in the forward direction because of the catalyst. Reaction It will Coordinate go just as fast
in the reverse direction. Since both the forward and reverse reaction rates are affected equally,
there is no net change to the equilibrium once it has been achieved. What about before you
reach equilibrium? Then the rates are not equal, sO the catalyst will increase the reaction rate,
and an equilibrium will be reached sooner. However, the final equilibrium achieved is exactly
the same with or without the catalyst.
So, IN GENERAL, WE EXPECT. A CATALYST TO HAVE NO EFFECT ON AN EQUILIBRIUM, ONCE
EQUILIBRIUM IS ESTABLISHED.
5). FACTORS THAT CHANGE EQUILIBRIUM: SURFACE AREA
Ifthe surface area is larger, then a reaction will reach an equilibrium more quickly, but the final
position reached is the same as with a smaller surface area.
Here 's Why:
Increasing the surface area in a heterogeneous reaction will normally increase the reaction rate.
It does SO because with more surface area exposed between the two reacting states, there will be
more collisions and therefore a greater chance for a reaction. For example, if we crush a solid
before trying to dissolve it in water, it will have more surfaçes exposed. Since it can only
dissolve from the outside edge, the larger number of surfaces will dissolve more quickly. At the
same time, with more surfaces exposed there will also be more sites available for the molecules
int he dissolved state to re-crystallize. Similarly, a large beaker of water has more surfaçe area
than a small beaker. The water can evaporate faster from a larger surface. However, the water
can also condense faster from the vpor state since there is more surface area available for the
reverse reaction as well.


---

### Page 5

Because of this, the reaction rates in the forward and reverse directions will be affected equally
by changing the surface area. The reaction will go faster in the forward direction because of an
increase in surface area. It will go. just as much faster ih the reverse direction. Since both
forward and reverse reaction rates are effected the same, there is no net change to the
equilibrium once it has been achieved. The net result is that surface area has no effect on
equilibrium.
Diagram:
What about before you reach equilibrium? Then the rates are not equal. Increasing the surface
area means that you get to equilibrium more quickly. However, eventually you reach a point
where the rates in the forward and reverse directions are equal. The approach to equilibrium is
different but the final equilibrium achieved is the same with and without the change in surface
area.
Graph:
Large crystats EFine powder
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500

D
2
3
4
5
:
Time (nours)
As shown by the red curve, finely crushed crystals dissolve more quickly than do
large crystals (the blue graph). However, the final equilibrium concentration reacted
is the same for both :
So, IN GENERAL, WE EXPECT SURFACE AREA TO HAVE NO EFFECT ON AN EQUILIBRIUM, ONCE
EQUILIBRIUM IS ESTABLISHED.