

---

### Page 1

## 5.6 - Application of Le Chatelier's Principle
Haber-Bosch Process
2
## 5.6 Application of Le Chatelier's Principle
pages 583-584 and 588 in Matter and Change
pages 553 and 554 in Health
Legendary Enchantment
a a Deal 2 damage to target creature or player
## 1 ee Add e P to your mana pool
## 1 * Colonial creatures gain +1/+2 until end of turn
## 2 a a Counter target spell, draw a card
## 2 e P Artifact Creatures you control gain vigilance
until end of turn
During peace time a scientist belongs to the World, but
during war time he belongs to his country Frits Haber
Le Chatelier 1888


---

### Page 2

## 5.6 - Application of Le Chatelier's Principle
The Common Ion Effect
The common ion effect is an example of Le Chatelier's! Principle.
It states that the solubility ofan ionic compound is decreased (less is
dissolved) by the addition of another ionic compound to the solution that
contains one of the ions already in the solution.
For example, if BasOAs was in equilibrium in a solution, then we would
have the following system:
BaSO46) Ba2* (aq) + SO,2 (aq)
Note - it is dissociated because it is soluble.
If we added barium chloride, another soluble substance to this system,
what would happen to the concentration of Ba2+?
IaSh PAtSIFKSTiSERI S
wer BAS9 Tess isheir beineRidisEny Abersis is more
solubility of BaSO. has been decreased.
Note only the addition of substances with common ions can affect the
equilibrium of a soluble substance.
We also need to consider if adding a substance will create an additional
precipitate.
This will cause ions from the original system to drop out, increasing the
solubility of the solid...
Ex) Determine what would happen to the solubility of sodium sulfate if WE
added thei following to a sodium sulfate solution in equilibrium:
a) Nac1
b) sulfuric acid
c) Ca(OH),


---

### Page 3

## 5.6 - Application of Le Chatelier's Principle
The Haber-Bosch Process
Nzg) + Hzg
2NH3g) + 46.1KJ
diatomic nitrogen makes up about 79% of the Earth's atmosphere; only a
few bacteria species can "fix" ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen
ammonia can then be changed into nitrates and nitrites
plants can use nitrates and nitrites (few can use ammonia) to meet their
nitrogen needs
In 1909, Fritz Haber first demonstrated how to synthesize ammonia from
nitrogen and hydrogen gas to be used in fertilizer
> incorporated several operations that increased the yield of ammonia
- cooled the reaction
- pressurized reactant chambers
the use of a catalyst
the removal of ammonia gas (by liquefication)
The above system was improved by Carl Bosch in 1913
Using Le Chatelier's Principle, why did the Haber-Bosch process increase
the yield of ammonia?
> increased pressure:
> lower temperatures:
> use of catalyst:
> removal of product:


---

### Page 4

## 5.6 - Application of Le Chatelier's Principle
## 5.6 Application of le Chatelier's Principle Assignment
1. Consider the following equilibrium system:
PbCl26t Pb2+ (ag) + 2CHog)
Describe what happens to the solubility of PbCl, when the following substances are
added to the solution. Why?
a) Pb(NO3)2
d) AgNO3
b) Nac1
e) NaBr
C) H,O
2. Consider the following equilibrium system:
AgBrg 1 Ag* (ag) + Br (ag)
Describe what happens to the solubility of AgBrg when the following substances are
added to the solution. Why?
a) Pb(NO3)2
c) NaC1
b) AgNO3
d) NaBr


---

### Page 5

## 5.6 - Application of Le Chatelier's Principle
3. Explain why more Zn(OH), dissolves when 3 M HCI is added to a saturated solution of
Zn(OH),- Start by writing the correct equilibrium equation.
4. Explain three ways in which the Haber-Bosch process utilizes Le Chatelier's principle to
increase the yield of ammonia in industrial fertilizer production.