

---

### Page 1

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
## 6.1 Introduction to Acids & Bases
In your years of studying
Ounal A
chemistry, you probably havel heard of a
onTg 30 mse an
few common acids and bases; ie.
hydrochloric acid,sodium hydroxide,
ammonia ,sulfuric acid, nitric acid, etc.
Acidsand bases arerclassified according
tovarious definitions that have been
created throughout the years; we will be
reviewing these definitions today.
Based on the textbook reading (Matter
and Change; pages 595 -599 and the
handout provided compiete the following
questions:
Mhen Chemists ke Redns,
1. List 3 common household acids and 3 common household bases.
acics: vinerpr, Oronges, lemons, pop,ehc
cantacich tolbolels, windex.
bases : Soops,
2. In the t-chart below, list 5 physical and/or chemical characteristics of açids and of bases to help
determine the operational definition of acids and bases.
Acids
Bases
sour toote
obitertaste.
ereoct w mglals o prodsce no nohceable rn uss
Ha as.
matalo.
Soluch Ono
## 0 fm elachelypic soluhons
d Sorm cloclol lyhc
VOno
piocuce iano.
olc herypadduvea
oc hay
lemus paper ocl
ahurns Mitmaus paper blue
olurns
slippeny paeling
engutral zec by bcAco
J
oyaciclo
neudraliago
1


---

### Page 2

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
3. Briefly explain the process of self-ionization. eoct to orm 0 Mgo* cnc
wo wotss meloewlco
$OH$
&
-
Gnecaa)
*
H20cey
30102) OHiag)
y
4. Explain whyH and H3O+ can be used interchangeably.
$RA$
H3ot E hyeltated
H* - ien
5. Using a Venn Diagramrcompare and contrast The Arrhenius and the Bronsted-Lowry models of
acids & bases.
Bxesled-Levory
Archanius
acids H*
donor
H*
cod: podieceo
bace : H
in soluon
aeceptor
baoe: prockuce
$OC$
Soluhon
6. Describe which model is better used to describe why NH3 is a base and why using a balanced
chemical equation.
7
-
+
NHgogp
HzOley <
$NA_4$
OHion)
log)
-
7
bOSR
H 9)
donales -
(aepla)
acid
* Bionsted- Lowry  uoed to
explain vohy
## 15 C - booR
(H* acceptor)
$NH_3$
2


---

### Page 3

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
7. Define & give an example for: an acid, a base, electrolyte (strong and weak).
conates 0 H* gn in solahon
A) HCI
acdo
O# 1D soluchon

H* oF paodaeceo
oae : pccepts
2
ex) NoOB, H3

%
Setisdugn thedh.conducto
elecholyte : an 09 Dego)
wRak- lessions)
ebockiiciuy (shengs manyilons;
8. Explain why a singlé arrow: is used in a strong electrolyte reaction equation and a double arrow is
used in a weak electrolyte reaction equation.
alaeholyt complote. disSociason
Srong
dssoclaction
weh eloetvalt  ncomplet
(SRsCAaR Joacton hoppenag 00
Lequil Shed
coeQ0s.
9. Define amphiprotic (sometimes refèrred to as àmphoteric) substances. Use examples to help in your
explanation.
0O bslh acdot locuake,
amphiprsts s can ach
&x) H20,HCO3
10. Explain why CHSCOOH is not considered a polyprotic acid.
* only Oneionizobke
H i6n.

I
-
C-cs0

$OFH$
H

lonol 6o lonizble
Lplar
e Seume
W has bosically
(Canc
:e
not
e
nonrionizolle)
polar
claehronaoghunhies
3


---

### Page 4

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
## 6.1 Introduction to Acids and Bases Assignment
1. Write the balanced ionization or dissociation reaction for the following acids and bases.
(Don't worry about the states of the reactants.)
a. Nitric acid HNO3 a H'agy . NOg(og)
b. Chloric acid HCIO3 a Hop + CIgiag)
A
- H+
C. Acetic acid CHgLOOH
CH3Lcoie4)
(AD
d. Lithium hydroxide LioHs A Lip * OHiog
+
e. Sulfurous acid 4a503 3 H (agp
HSD3 (ag)
2. Name each of the following acids.
aciel
a. HPO4 phosphore
acd
b. H3BO3 looric
aci d
C. HI hydroioclic
d. CH3COOH acetec acro
e. HF hydrofluprc Ccid
6


---

### Page 5

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
3. Identify the hydrogen-ion donor(s) & acceptor(s) in each of the following reactions:
H+ donors
H+ acceptors
(the acids)
(the bases)
a. HNO3 () + H2O() -H3O+ (aq) + NO3 (aq)
$HNO_3$
H0
b. C,H5NH2 (1) + H2Q() - C,H5NH3+ (aq) + OH-(ag)
H20
$CaHSMH_2$
C. CH3CO2 H() + H2O() 1 CH3COz(ag) + H3O+(ag)
CHgO,A
H,O
4. Which of the following would you expect to act as Bronsted-Lowry bases. Why? Hint =
think about charge!
a) Br b) Li+
c) HPO4
d) NH4+
e) H20
f) NH
poesidy
wonodh is
-deperdo
(eachng wth
5. Consider the following two reactions. In which reaction does HPOA act as a base? In which,
does it act as an acid?
Is H,PO4 an acid
or base?
a. H,PO4 (ag) + HzO() - H3PO4(ag) + OH(ag)
bool (H+ acceptor)
b. HPO4(ag) + H20(1) - HPO42-(ag) + H3O+(ag)
OrAd (H+ donor)
7