

---

### Page 1

Acia-Base Reactions
&
Identifying Properties of
Acids and Bases
-
Understanding chemical behavior helps you understand your CONCEPTS
world. However, there are too many reactions to try to remember
them all individually. It would be somewhat like trying to remember a classifying compounds as acids
the names and occupations ofallt the in Vancouver! You) have and bases
a
people
seen many examples ofl how classifying compoundsi into groups with aI Brônsted-Lowry definitions of
A
similar characteristics reduces the amountofi information one must acids and bases
remember. Acids and bases comprise two groups of substances that a conjugate acid-base pairs
havel been categorized by their chemicall behavior.
a characteristics of amphiprotic
substances
a preparation and properties of
acids
a preparation and properties of
bases
20-1 General Characteristics
of Acids and Bases
Ifyou) have ever tasted a lemon you are aware of its very sour taste.
Lemon juice contains an acid. Grapefruit and spoiled milk also are
sour due to the presence of acids. Sour taste isaj property common to
compounds classified as acids. If you have ever gotten soap in your
mouth, you have noted a bitter taste. Bitterness is common to com-
pounds classified as bases. Do not try the taste test because some
acids and bases are harmful.
One property of acids is how they behave when they contact some
metals. When hydrochloric acid and magnesium metal are mixed to-
gether, bubbles are produced and the magnesium metal reacts. When
tested, the bubbles are found tol be hydrogen gas. A similar reaction
occurs when other acids are combined with magnesium. In Figure
20-1 you can see the long glass tube that is used to measure the
Thet English word acid comes from acidus, the Latin word for
amount of hydrogen generated by the acid and metal. When most
sour. Sour taste isa prominent characteristic of the compounds called acids. Many
metals are combined with a base, no noticeable change occurs.
fruits taste sour. You can be quite confident that foods such as cherries, lemons, grape-
An electric current is not conducted through pure water, but it is
fruit, yogurt, and tomatoes all contain compounds that are classified as acids.
conducted through an acid solution. Basic solutions also conduct
electricity." The apparatuss shown in Figure: 20-2is used to test conduc-
Bases also have a property that is familiar to you. A substance that has a soapy or
tivity. The presence ofi ions allows current to flow between the two
slippery feel to it generally contains a compound classified as a base. In this chapter,
electrodes, and thel light bulb glows. Solutions which conduct an elec- Figure 20-1 The reaction of magne-
you will study other characteristics used to describe acids and bases and why these
tric current are called electrolytes. Table 20-1 lists the characteristic sium metal with hydrochloric acid
compounds are so important to the study of chemistry.
properties of acids and bases which are both electrolytes.
produces hydrogen gas.
559


---

### Page 2

## 560 CHAPTER 20
ACID-BASE REACTIONS 561
Figure 20-4 Bromthymol blue indi-
cator turns yellow in the presence of
an acid as shown in the
on the left. Silver nitrate phveph to
detect the presence of chloride ions
in the beaker on the right.


- -
H0
46
Figure 20-2 Conductivity testing of Table 20-1
pure water on the left, hydrochloric CHARACTERISTIC PROPERTIES OF ACIDS AND BASES
acid in the middle, and acetic acid
on the right. Note that water
Definition of Acids Bases
does not conduct and Peror conductiv- ACIDS
$BASES$
20-21
and
ity of the two acid solutions varies. Dissolve in water to give a Dissolve in water to give a
Hydrogen chloride, HCl,isachoking: gas ati room temperature. Ifiti is o
cooled below
The
Know?
solution that:
solution that:
84.9°C, it] liquefies. liquid state does not conduct Lou
1. tastes sour
1. tastes bitter
an electric current soi itr must not contain ions. HCI readily dissolvesi in One of the earliest definitions of
2. conducts an electric
2. conducts an electric
water, and the solution does conduct an electric current. What are the an acid was proposed by Svente
current
current
ions and from where did they come?
Arrhenius, a. Swedish chemist.
3. causes certain dyes to 3. causes certain dyes to
Certain compounds, called indicators, can be used to detect the According to Arrhenius, an acid is
change color
change color
presence of acids and bases. The indicator will appearas one color in any compound which produces
4. liberates hydrogen when 4. feels slippery
the presence ofh concentrations ofH+ (acid solution) and another hydrogen ions in solution, and a
it with certain
color when the hign concentration is low (base solution). How indica- base is any compound which pro-
reacts
5. loses the above proper-
tors to H+ concentration is discussedi in Section 20-11. When duces hydroxide ions in solution.
metals
ties when iti is reacted
an indicator respond such as
blue is added to the HCI solution,
5. loses the above proper-
with an acid, though
the color oft the indicator bromthymol to clear Bromthymol bluei is
ties when it is reacted
the resulting solution
changes yellow.
with a base, though
will conduct a current
always yellow in the presence of high concentrations of H'. Thus you
the resulting solution
conclude that HCI in water contains H+ ions.
will conduct a current
If the HCI in water produced H*,aj positive ion, then the solution
also must contain a negative ion. A possible candidatei is the chloride
ion, CI. Adding silverr nitrate is the qualitativet test used to confirm the
presence of chloridei ions in as solution. Ifa drop ofAgNO,lag) is added
to thel HCI solution, acloudy white precipitate forms as in) Figure 20-4,
indicating thej presence of chloridei ions. The precipitate is silver chlo-
ride.
Crlaq) + Ag*lag) AgClts).
When HCI reacts with water,it! produces thel H*, which combines with
Figure 20-31 Litmus is an indicator.
the water molecule toj produceal hydroniumi ion, H,0*.
Blue litmus paper turns red in the
acid
$BH$
base
HCI + H20 H,ot + CI
CHEM THEME
presence of an acid. Red litmus
Since H,0+ represents a hydrated
turns blue in the presence ofa base.
Thel hydronium ion is a hydrated proton. A model for the formation proton (H), the notations H,0*
Another acid-base indicator, pH
of the hydronium ion is shown in Figure 20-5. Though more than one and H'(aq) are often used inter-
hydrion paper, turns a range of col-
water moleculei is involved, thel hydrated proton ist traditionally shown changeably in acid-base chemis-
ors depending on the degree of acid-
with as single water molecule. A number of different experiments sup- try.
ity or basicity.
port the idea that the hydrogen ion is hydrated when water is the


---

### Page 3

## 562 CHAPTER 20
ACID-BASE REACTIONS 563
Figure 20-5The formation of the
Figure 20-7 Bromthymol blue re-
hydroniumi ion involves aproton
mains blue in the of a base
transfer from the acid to the water
such as aqueous presence An
This
molecule. reaction isaBrôn-
ammonia. aque-
sted-Lowry acid-base reaction.
ous ammoniasolution causes red lit-
mus paper to turn blue.
Acid
Base
solvent. Noticel how the water! behavedi in the reaction with HCI. Water
accepted the H* in forming the hydronium ion.
Ammonia, NH3 also isa gas-atr room temperature. When iti is cooled
below -33.35°C, it liquefies. This liquid does not conduct electricity,
so it does not contain ions. However, when ammonia is dissolved in
water, the solution conducts electricity.
Ifan acid is accidentally spilled, a weak base may be applied to neu-
tralize the acid and quickly nullify its effects. Likewise, ifa base is Litmus is
Figure 20-6 The formation of the
accidentally spilled, aweak acid is to the effects of the
ammonium ion involves the transfer
applied nullify
ofap proton from the water molecule
base.
to the ammonia molecule. This reac-
Ift the neutralization reaction of hydrochloric acid and potassium Re
Blu
tion is al Brônsted-Lowry acid-base
hydroxidei isv written in terms ofi ions,you will see what happens when Aci
Bas
reaction.
the salt is formed.
H,o*laq) + Cllag) + K'laq) + OHlaq)
Base
Acid
2H,00) + K'laq) + Cllaq)
Notice that in this expression, there are terms common tol both sides.
To write the net ionic equation, the spectator ions arer not included in
the equation.
Do Vou Know? The water donated lap proton (H') which was used by NH3 to form NH;.
HO*laq) + OH(aq) 2H,0
The importance ofthes solvent in acid-baser reactionsl led chemists toa
H' from HCI from NaOH neutral water
ist, Gilbert Lewis an American chem- specific definition of acid and base.. Johannes Brônsted inj Denmark,
acid expanded the definition of an and' Thomas Lowry in England, independently
that an acid
anda base to include many isany substancet that can produce (or
proposed while base is
compounds which do not contain
donate)aproton,
any substance that can
20-3 Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
hydrogen. A Lewis acid isane elec-
acceptap proton inareaction.
tron pair acceptor; al Lewis base is Water can act tasaproton: acceptor or raproton donor. Compounds
When NH3 is combined with water, the ammonia acts as the base,
an electron pair donor.
andi ions that exhibit this dual behavior are called amphiprotic. How
accepting aj proton from the water, which acts as an acid.
water behaves depends on what other ions are present. In the case of
$CHEM$
HCland
$THEME$
H,0, water actsasabasei in acceptingt the proton from thel HCI.
H
Water isal Brônsted-Lowry base. In the case of NH,, water donates a
H:N:H + H:O:H H:N:H + :OH
In any Bronsted-Lowry acid-base
proton toj produce the ammonium ion and the hydroxide ion. In this
H
H
equation, two conjugate pairs are
case, water acts as a Bronsted-Lowry acid. Ammonia (NH3) is also
present:
amphiprotic. In the equation above, NH3 acts as a base, but in some
base'
conjugate pair
reactions itcan act as an acid (donate a proton) to becomet the amide
Once the ammonia gets the proton from the water, the NH3 becomes HCN+ H,O 1 H,0* + CN"
ion (NH,). All acid-base reactions can be described as competing for
the ammonium ion, NH.This ammoniumi ioni is capable ofdonatinga acid base acid base
protons.
proton to some other ion if the occasion arises. Molecules and ions
When an acid such as HCI and al base such as KOH combine, they
that differ only by a proton (hydrogen ion) are sometimes referred to
conjugate pair
react with each other to counteract their acidic and basic) properties.
as conjugate acid-base pairs. NH: and NH3 area conjugate acid-
conjugate pair
When moles of protons donated by the acid and moles of protons
base pair. Conjugater means paired together. H0 and OH are another HCO3 + H,PO: e H,CO, HPO!
accepted by the base are equal, neutralization occurs. A salt is
conjugate acid-base pair.
base acid acid base
produced, and ifthel base is OH, water is the other product.
The acid form of the pair contains aj proton that is missing in the
base form. The presence of a proton is the only difference between conjugate pair
HCI+E KOH KClaq) H0
members ofa conjugate acid-base pair.


---

### Page 4

## 564 CHAPTER 20
NH: and NH3
acid
base
H20 and OH
acid
base
You might ask why, in this situation, NH3 does not act like an acid,
produce a proton, H*, and become NH2.
NH3 * H* + NH2
acid
base
There are few molecules that attract hydrogen ions strongly enough
to pull one off the ammonia molecule and form the amide ion.
Acids and bases that donate or accept one proton are called
monoprotic. If a substance is capable of accepting more than one
proton, it is a polyprotic base. A polyprotic acid is capable of donating
morei than one proton. Examples of polyprotic acids are sulfuric acid,
H,SO4 and phosphoric acid, H,PO4-
Polyprotic acids ionize in steps. In each step the acid donates a
proton.
1st ionization step: H2S04 + H20
HSO4 + Hso+
acid
base
2nd ionization step: HSO4 + H20
SO3 + H30*
acid
base
Phosphoric acid ionizes in three steps since it is capable of donating
three protons.
1st ionization step: H;PO4 + H20
H,PO4 + H,0*
acid
base
2nd ionization step: H2PO4 + H20 > HPO4 + H3O+
acid
base
3rd ionization step: HPO3 + H20
PO4 + HO+
acid
base
Both HSO4 and H,PO4 may act as either an acid or base. These ions
are amphiprotic like water.
20-41 Preparation and Properties
of Acids
Sulfuric acid More sulfuric acid is produced yearly by industry
than any other chemical in the world. Why is sulfuric acid used sO
widely? Primarily, it is cheap to make. Sulfur, oxygen, and water are
the raw materials needed to make the acid. There are large, natural
deposits of sulfur available, plus more sulfur is produced as a by-
product of many metal-refining processes. Another raw material
Do
Know?
needed is oxygen, which is very plentiful in the air- another inexpen-
sive
is
also
you
resource. Water necessary and it is inexpensive. The com-
Oleum is the Latin word for oil.
mercial reaction to prepare the acid is simple, which also helps to
Sulfuric acid was once called oil of keep the cost down. There are no by-products to pollute the environ-
vitriol.
ment, another cost-saving feature.