

---

### Page 1

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
## 6.1 Introduction to Acids & Bases
O OriginalArtist
In your years of studying
Reproduction rights obtainable from
chemistry, you probably have heard of a
www. CartoonStock.com
few common acids and bases; ie.
hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide,
ammonia sulfuric acid, nitric acid, etc.
Acids and bases are classified according to
various definitions that have been created
throughout the years; you will be
reviewing these definitions today.
Based on the textbook reading (Heath;
pages 558 -564) and the handout provided
complete the following questions:
When Chemists take acid trips.
1. List 3 common. household acids and 3 common household bases.
2. In the t-chart below, list 5 physical and/or chemical characteristics of acids and of bases to help
determine the operational definition of acids and bases. Note: operational definitions are based on
what you can actually observe in the lab
Acids
Bases
1


---

### Page 2

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
3. Briefly explain the process of self-ionization in water and provide a balanced chemical equation to
show your understanding.
4. Explain why H+ and H3O+ can be used interchangeably.
5. Fill in the table below using the appropriate definitions.
Acid
Base
Arrhenius's
Definition
Bronsted-Lowry
Definitions
6. Describe which model (from question 5) is better used to describe why NH3 is a base and why using
a balanced chemical equation.
2


---

### Page 3

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
7. Define & give an example for: an acid, a base, electrolyte (strong and weak).
8. Explain why a single arrow is used in a strong electrolyte reaction equation (as in HCI) and a double
arrow is used in a weak electrolyte reaction equation (as in NH3).
9. Define amphiprotic (sometimes referred to as amphoteric) substances. Use examples to help in your
explanation.
10. CHALLENGE! Explain why CH3COOH is not considered a polyprotic acid. Hint: draw the Lewis
Structure.
3


---

### Page 4

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
SUPPLEMENTAL NOTES
Acid or Base?
Theories of Acids and Bases:
Arrhenius explained the phenomenon of electrolytes by stating that ions must be present in the
solutions to carry the electric current (electrolytes conduct current when dissolved in solution).
O Since acids and bases are electrolytes, he proposed:
All acids produce hydrogen ions (H*)when dissolved in water.
All bases produce hydroxide ions (OH) when dissolved in water.
o Unfortunately, his model was oversimplified and could not explain the role of the solvent in
acid/base theory and could not explain why salts with no hydrogen or hydroxide could
exhibit acidic or basic properties.
Bronsted-Lowry Theory was developed that explained the role of the solvent and the existence of
acidic and basic salts, the theory stated:
O An acid is a molecule or ion that can give up a hydrogen ion.
a proton, H*, donor
H3O is called a_ hydronium ion which is a hydrogenated hydrogen ion = H'(ag) is
equivalent to the H30+ ion.
O A base is a molecule or ion that can react with a hydrogen ion.
A proton (H+) acceptor (a substance that produces a hydroxide, OH- ion)
O Acid-base reactions are. hydrogen-ion exchange reactions
O Water is the most important solvent and aqueous solutions are most common.
Indicators are compounds that can be used to detect the presence of acids or bases. Litmus paper is
a common type of indicator.
Weak and Strong Acids and Bases
Ionization = any process in which ions are formed:
Dissociation to form ions (the separation of an ionic compound into its constituent
ions)
A: reaction of a molecular compound with a solvent (usually water to form ions)
Strong acids ionize completely and are strong electrolytes / HC1, HNO3, HCIO4
$O [acid] = [H+]$
Weak acids ionize partially and are weak electrolytes, most often found as HF
o HF + H,O0+ H,0 (aq) + F (aq)
O The forward and the reverse reaction are occurring simultaneously
Strong bases dissociate completely and are strong electrolytes, NaOH
Weak bases dissociate partially and are weak electrolytes, NH3
Water
Water is a unique substance as it can act as either an acid or a base, depending on what other ions
are present. These types of substances are. known as amphiprotic.
However, even without other ions present, water conducts some electricity (although very little).
This must be due to the presence of ions:
o Self-lonization: in pure water, one water molecule donates one H+ ion to another water
molecule, which results in a hydronium ion and a hydroxide ion.
Self-ionization further exemplifies water's amphiprotic properties.
4


---

### Page 5

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
Types of Acids
1) Monoprotic - a solution that produces one mole of H+ ions per mole
Some Polyprotic Acids
of acid. Ex. HC1, HNO3
Formula
Name
2) Polyprotic - Acids that can give up more than one hydrogen ion per
molecule are called polyprotic acids
$HS$
Hydrogen sulfide
Diprotic - H2SO4
H,SO4 Sulfuric acid
$Triprotic = HPO_4$
H,SO3 Sulfurous acid
polyprotic acids are given in the table on the right here. Knowing
their names and familiar with their properties (ionization for
HPO4 Phosphoric acid
example) is an asset for you.
H2C,04 Oxalic acid
They ionize to give more than one H+ ions per molecule.
H2CO3 Carbonic acid
Possible forms of three polyprotic acids are given below after their
dissociation into H+ ions.
H2C3H,04 Malonic acid
HS, HS, S2-
H2SO4, HSO4, SO,2-
H3PO4, HPO4, HPO42-, PO43-
Rules for Naming Acids, Bases and Salts
1) Binary Acids: are made of only two elements
i. Prefix is always hydro
ii. Name the second element with the suffix "ic"
2) Ternary acids: more than two elements(usually contain a polyatomic ion)
i. For the acid containing the most common polyatomic ion of its group simply use
the first part of the polyatomic ion name and follow with the suffix "ic"
Chloric acid HCIO3
ii. For the acid containing the polyatomic with one less Oxygen than the "ic", use the
suffix - ous"
Chlorous acid HCIO2
ii. For the acid containing the polyatomic with two less Oxygen than the "ic", us the
prefix "hypo" and the suffix - ous".
Hypochlorous
TABLE 6.6 Compounds that are acids in water solution and their anions
acid HCIO
Acid
Oxidation number Name in aqueous
Name andformula
iv. For the acid
formula of nonmetal
solution
of anion
containing the
*HNO3
+5
nitric acid
nitrate, NO3
polyatomic with
$HNO_2$
+3
nitrous acid
nitrite, NO2
*H2S04
+6
sulfuric acid
sulfate, S04 -2
one more oxygen
$H_2S_03$
+4
sulfurous acid
sulfite, SO3-2
than the "ic", use *H3 PO4
+5
phosphoric acid
phosphate, PO43
the prefix "per"
$H_2CO_3$
+4
carbonic acid
carbonate, CO3-2
and the suffix "ic" HC104
+7
perchloric acid
perchlorate, CI04
Perchloric acid *HCIO3
+5
chloric acid
chlorate, CIO3
$HCIO_2$
+3
chlorous acid
chlorite, CIO2
$HCIO_4$
#HCIO
+1
hypochlorous acid
hypochlorite, CIO -
$HC_1$
-1
hydrochloric acid
chloride, CI
3) Bases and salts: simply
* These acids are the most commonf for aparticular nonmetal.
use the normal rules for # Although only chlorinei is shown, similar compounds are formed by the other halogens and
would be named the same way as are these chlorine-containing compounds.
naming compounds
(ionic or covalent)
5


---

### Page 6

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
## 6.1 Introduction to Acids and Bases Assignment
1. Write the balanced ionization or dissociation reaction for the following acids and bases.
(Don't worry about the states of the reactants, but the states of the products are important.)
a. Nitric acid
b. Chloric acid
C. Acetic acid
d. Lithium hydroxide
e. Sulfurous acid
2. Name each of the following acids.
a. H3PO4
b. H3BO3
C. HI
d. CH3COOH
e. HF
6


---

### Page 7

Chem 30
Unit 6: Acids and Bases
3. Identify the hydrogen-ion donor(s) & acceptor(s) in each of the following reactions:
H+ donors
H+ acceptors
(the acids)
(the bases)
a. HNO3 (1) + H2O(1) - H3O+ (aq) + NO3 (aq)
b. C,H5NH2 (1) + H2O(1) - C,H5NH3+ (aq) + OH-(aq)
C. CH3CO2 H(1) + H2O() 1 CH3COz(ag) + H3O+(aq)
4. Which of the following would you expect to act as Bronsted-Lowry bases. Why? Hint -
think about charge!
a) Br b) Li+
c) H3PO4
d) NH4+
e) H20
) NH2
5. Consider the following two reactions. In which reaction does H2P04 act as a base? In which
does it act as an acid?
Is H,PO4 an acid
or base?
a. HPO4 (ag) + H20(1) - H3PO4(aq) + OH-(ag)
b. HPO4(aq) + H2O(1) 1 HPO42-(aq) + H3O+(aq)
7