

---

### Page 1

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
&
Learning
Acids and Basese
H
## 6.2 - Strength of Acids & Bases
pages 570-571 in Heath
pages 602-607 in Matter and Change
It's basico Chemistry
1


---

### Page 2

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
Conjugate acid-base pairs.
Conjugate acid-base pairs differ from each other by the presence or absence of a
single hydrogen ion (or proton).
Every acid has a conjugate base, and every base has a conjugate acid.
Ex) Write the conjugate bases for the following acids:
$HF$
$HSO_4$
Ex) Write the conjugate acids for the following bases:
PO,3-
SO42-
An acid in an aqueous solution always produces a species capable of producing a
base, A base in solution always produces a substance capable of acting as an acid.
Therefore, an acid-base equation contains an acid and a base for both the forward
and reverse reactions.
HSO4 + H05HO+ + SO42-
2


---

### Page 3

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
Polyprotic Acids
Some acids have more than one hydrogen ion they can give up. For
example, H2S04 has 2 H+ it can possibly give up.
The first hydrogen ion is released as:
H,SO4(ag) * H+ (aq) + HSO4ag)
The second hydrogen is more difficult to remove, but it can happen :
HSO4(ag) * H+ (aq) + SO:?(ag)
Each hydrogen you release after the first one gets progressively more
difficult to remove from these types of acids.
Acids that can donate more than one H + are called polyprotic.
Ex) Write all the equations showing the release of a H + ion for the acid
H3C6H507.
CH,CO,H
HOCCO,H
CH,CO,H
citricacid
3


---

### Page 4

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
Strong and Weak Acids and Bases
A strong acid is identified as one that can produce many H+ (or H30+)
ions. Note the similarity between the definition of a strong electrolytic
solution.
Therefore, the stronger the acid, the more H+ ions are produced. On the
other hand, a weak acid produces few H+ ions.
Strong bases produce many OH- ions while weak bases produce few OH
ions.
Strong acids and bases produce one way reactions. That is the acid or base
breaks down completely to produce ions. At equilibrium, there are very
few reactants left concentration is low).
Strong acid
Strong base
HC1 * H+ (aq) + Clag)
NaoH e Na'ag + OH(ag)
On the other hand, weak acids and bases do not ionize completely. For
weak electrolytes equilibrium lies on the left hand (reactant) side - there
are few ions present.
Weak Acid
Weak Base
HCHO2 H+ (aq) +CHO2lag)"
NH3Ig) + H,Ogt-NH, (aq) + OH (aq)
It is important to not confuse acid and base strength with dilution.
Dilute and concentrated refers to the relative amounts of solute and
solvent in a solution.
The acid and base strength refers specifically to the concentration of ions
in the solution.
A strong acid is still a strong acid even if it gets diluted. A weak acid is
still weak even when it is concentrated.
4


---

### Page 5

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
Predicting acid-base reactions in water
-acid-base reactions always yield conjugate acid-base pairs
H
H:N:H + H:O:H €
H:N:H + :O:H
:
H
H
base
acid
conjugate conjugate
acid
base
T
-a strong acid has a weak conjugate base
ex: HCI
-a strong base has a weak conjugate acid
ex: NaOH
-a weak acid has a strong conjugate base
ex: CH3COOH
-a weak base has a strong conjugate acid
ex: CH3NH2
5


---

### Page 6

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
Ionization Constants
Since acid/base solutions are at equilibrium, we can write equilibrium
constant expressions for them.
equilibrium constants involving acids are known as Ka.
constants for base solutions will be denoted by Kb.
These values can be found in your resource package (Table 14).
Ex) Write the equilibrium constant expression for the acid or base in
solution.
HCLg) + H,O0  HO'ag + Clag)
NH3(ag) + H,Op 4 NH4'(ag) + OH(ag)
A large Ka indicates there are many H+ ions present. Therefore, this
indicates a strong acid.
A large Kb indicates a strong base.
Polyprotic acids:
-strength of the acid decreases with each H + ion removed.
Acid
Kai
Ka2
Kas
sulfuric acid (H,S04) 1.0 x 103 1.2 X 10-2
chromic acid (H2Cr04) 9.6
## 3.2 X 10-7
oxalic acid (H2C,04) 5.4 x 10-2 5.4 x 10-5
sulfurous acid (H2SO3) 1.7 x 10-2 6.4 X 10-8
phosphoric acid (H3PO4) 7.1 x 10-3 6.3 X 10-8 4.2 X 10-13
glycine (C2HENO2)
## 4.5 x 10-3 2.5 x 10-10
citric acid (C6Hg07)
## 7.5 X 10-4 1.7 X 10-5 4.0 X 10-7
carbonic acid (H2CO3) 4.5 x 10-7 4.7 X 10-11
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) 1.0 x 10-7 1.3 x 10-13
6


---

### Page 7

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
## 6.2 Strength of Acids and Bases Assignment
1) List thei following acids in order from strongest to weakest.
$HI$
$HNO_3$
$HS$
H,SO4
HC,H;O2
H,PO4
2) List all oft thej polyprotic acids from problem #1.
3) Write the Ka expression for the reaction in which each oft the following acts as an acid with water
a) HCN
b) HPO42-
c) HNO2
4) Write the Kb expression for the reaction in which each ofthe following acts as a base with water
a). HS-
bCH,NH2
C)F
7


---

### Page 8

## 6.2 - Strength of Acids and Bases
5) Write the formulas for the conjugate base of each of the following acids
a. HSO3
b. HCO3
C. NH4*
6) Write the formulas for the conjugate acid of each of the following bases.
a. HO
b. CO;2-
C. PH3
7) Using your knowledge oft the Bronsted-Lowry theory of acids and bases, write equations for the following
acid-base reactions and indicate each conjugate acid-base pair
a) HNOsag + OH(ag) ->
b) CH3NH2lag) +] H,O0-s
c) OHwp-HPOP->
d) H,O'ag + OHag-->
8) Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction of potassium hydroxide and nitric acid.
8