

---

### Page 1

## 6.3 - lonization of water and Kw
## 6.3 - Ionization of Water
pages 608-609 in Matter and Change
pages 572-573 in Health
onization of Water
In this reaction, the vast majority
of the water remains as H,0.
Only about 1 water molecule in
## 500 million is ionized.
H0-H,0-H,0-OH
1


---

### Page 2

## 6.3 - lonization of water and Kw
Water is considered a non-electrolyte (will not conduct electricity)
However, a few water molecules will dissociate to form ions as
represented by:
2H,O0 1 H,O'(ag) + OH (aq)
Because this system is in equilibrium, the equilibrium constant for water
can be determined.
H,O'_OH
K-
H,o+ 0H
H,O is not included
H,oH,0)
because it is liquid and therefore constant
This is called the ion product constant for water or Kw
-At 250C, Kw has been experimentally determined to be 1.0 X 10-14
Water has many hydronium and hydroxide ions; therefore:
1.00x10-14 H,0OH-
$V_1.00x_10-14 = Vx?$
10410'--wo-or
Solutions can be classified as acidic, basic or neutral according to:
H,0']>[OH acidic
$H,0'=[OH neutral$
H,0'<[OH basic
2


---

### Page 3

## 6.3 - lonization of water and Kw
Calculating H30+] in STRONG Acids and [OH-] in STRONG Bases
We will consider strong acids as those that have a Ka>1.
-You can use Table 14 to determine if you are working with a strong
acid or weak acid. Recall that a strong acid is one that completely
ionizes.
When working with a strong acid or a strong base we will calculate the
concentration of hydrogen ions or hydroxide ions in the same fashion
we have in the past.
Ex) Calculate H30+] for a 0.050 M solution of Perchloric acid.
Ex) NaOH is a strong base. Calculate [OH ] for a 0.010 M solution of
sodium hydroxide.
3


---

### Page 4

## 6.3 - lonization of water and Kw
Calculating [OH] in STRONG Acids and [H30+] in STRONG Bases
When we are determining the ion conçentrations for an acid, we are
generally concerned with [H30+].
Likewise, when determining the ion concentrations for a base, we are
concerned about [OH.
However, we may be asked to find [OH] in an acid or the [H+] in a base.
Remember that we are calculating the ion concentrations for acid/base
solutions, which means they are mixed with water.
If we mix an acid with water, we are adding OH to the acid because
water does ionize a bit. Therefore, we can use Kw to calculate [OH].
ex: What are the hydronium ion and hydroxide ion concentrations in a
## 0.050 mol/L aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid at 250C? Is the solution
acidic or basic?
4


---

### Page 5

## 6.3 - lonization of water and Kw
## 6.3 Ionization of Water Assignment
1. The concentration of either the H+ ion of OHion is given for 3 aqueous
solutions at 298K. For each solution, calculate [H+] or [OH]. State whether
solution is acidic, basic or neutral.
a) [H+] = 1.0 x10-13M
b) [OH] = 1.0 X 10-7M
c) [OH] = 1.0 X 10-3M
2. What is the [H3O+] in a 0.025M solution of NaOH. Is this solution acidic,
basic or neutral?
5


---

### Page 6

## 6.3 - lonization of water and Kw
## 6.3 Ionization of Water Assignment
3. A 2.5L solution contains 5.6 g of hydroiodic acid. What is the
concentration of hydroxide ions in this solution? Is this solution acidic,
basic or neutral?
4. Postassium hydroxide is a very strong base. If 6 mols are found in an 8L
solution, what is the hydronium ion concentration in this solution? Is this
solution acidic, basic or neutral?
5. 10.4 8 of nitric acid are found in 750 mL of water. What is the
hydronium concentration of this solution?
6. A 500mL (0.50M) solution of sodium hydroxide is diluted with 250mL
of water. What are the final concentrations of [H+] and [OH] in this
solution? Is this solution acidic, basic or neutral?
6