

---

### Page 1

## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale
The pH Scale
Hyurochloric acid Lemon Apple Banana Water Bakings soda
Ammonia Draine daaner
.
Mostacidic .
Most basic
Vinegar Tomato
Milk Blood
Soap
He's
6.5-pH and pOH Scale
pages 608-614 in Matter and Change
Maybe on the pH scale,
because he's basic


---

### Page 2

## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale
When we refer to the pH scale, we are actually just referring to [H*] ions in an
acidic or basic solution (by comparing this concentration to neutral water).
These concentrations are often very small (i.e. 1.3 X 10-3) and cumbersome to
work with.
We use the pH scale because these concentrations are converted to easier
numbers to work with.
pH is defined as the negative log of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
a solution. Therefore, pH scale is a logarithmic scale.
$pH = -log [H*]$
Ex) Find the pH of the [H+] values given below:
a) 1 X 10-3
C) 4.7: X 10-9
d) 1.0 X 10-7
Solutions with [H] > 1.0 X 10-7 are acids.
Solutions with [H*] < 1.0 X 10-7 are bases.
Acids
Bases
Neutral
pH <7
pH>7
$pH =7$
lower number = stronger
higher number = stronger
Note: Each jump on the pH scale is an increase in strength of 10. For example,
an acid at pH 3 is ten times stronger than an acid at pH 4. Likewise, an acid at
pH 3 is 100 times as strong as a pH 5. Same thing with bases. A base at pH 11 is
ten times weaker than a base at 12.
Sometimes you have to calculate the [H*] before you can determine pH.
Ex) Calculate the pH of 0.0100 M HNO3 solution. Is this solution acidic or
basic?


---

### Page 3

## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale
pOH
If we have a scale based on [H*] then there should also be a scale based on
[OH]. This is referred to as pOH.
$pOH = - log [OH-]$
$pH + pOH = 14$
Ex) Calculate the pH of a solution made by mixing 0.20 g of NaOH
with water to make a .500 L solution.
NOTE: If we are given the pH or pOH of a solution, we can use it to calculate
the [H*] or [OH].
$[H+] = antilog (-pH)$
[OH] = antilog (-pOH)


---

### Page 4

## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale
Ex) What is the [H+] for a solution with pH of 8.3?
Ex) Find the hydronium ion concentration in a solution with a pH of
12.6.
Ex) What are the [Hand [OH in a healthy person's blood that has a pH of 7.40?
Assume that the temperature is 298K.


---

### Page 5

## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale
Ka and pH
What pH results when 0.25 mol of acetic acid, CH,COOH is dissolved in
enough water to make 1 L of solution?
To find pH we need to determine [H+]...
1. Write down the dissociation equation
2. Determine the Ka
3. Determine [CH,COOH)
4. Write down equilibrium expression (K.)
5. Find pH using pH = -log[H+]
Ex) A 0.24M solution of the weak acid, H 2CO3 has a pH of 3.49. Determine the
Ka for H,CO3-


---

### Page 6

## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale
## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale Assignment
1. Calculate the pH of a solution of nitric acid that:
a. has a concentrations of 1.0 X 104 M
b. consists of 6.3 & of solute dissolved in 1.00 L of solution?
2. Calculate the pH of a solution that consists of 5.0 g of HC1 in 250 mL of solution.
3. What is the [H*] of a solution with a pH of 10.0 at 25°C? What is the pOH?
4. What is the pH of an aqueous solution containing 0.00200 M barium hydroxide, Ba
(OH), a strong base?


---

### Page 7

## 6.5 - pH and pOH Scale
5. Challenge: Determine the Kb for the benzoate ion, CH;COO-.
6. Calculate the pOH of a 0.100 M solution of acetic acid.
7. A 2.67 8 sample of hydrogen fluoride gas (HF) is dissolved in sufficient water to make 1.05 L of
solution at 25°C to form an acidic solution. Hydrogen fluoride is a weak acid with K. = 6.6 X 10-4.
Calculate the pOH of this solution.
8. Challenge: A 0.20 M solution of a weak acid has a pH of 1.67. Calculate the Kaof this acid.
Assume a 1:1 ratio in the ionization equation.