

---

### Page 1

Name:
School:
Chemistry 30: Unit 6 Hand In Assignment #2
This assignment covers material found in sections 6.5 and 6.6. Show all ofyour work for
full marks including all formulas, balanced ionization or dissociation equations,
substitution ofvalues and final answers with correct units and significant figures.
1. Calculate the pH and pOH of the following. Include the ionization or
dissociation equation as needed. (3 marks each)
a. 1.3 X 10-2 M HBr
b. 4.8 X 10-3 M NaOH
2. Determine the [H3O+] and [OH] of the following solutions: (2 marks each)
$a. pH=2$
$b. pH=9$


---

### Page 2

Name:
School:
3. Calculate the [H3O+] and pOH in a 300.0 mL solution that has a
concentration of 0.040M of HC1. Include the ionization equation. (4 marks)
4. A solution of HF contains 12 grams in 500.0mL. (5 marks)
a. Find [H+]. Make sure to show the ionization equation (with water).
b. Calculate the pH of the above solution.
5. Predict the products of the following neutralization reactions (be sure to
balance the equation and include states as well). (2 marks)
a. HClag) + Mg(OH)2(s) e
b. HPO4(aq) + KOH(s) e


---

### Page 3

Name:
School:
6. Determine if the pH at the equivalence point is 7, >7 or <7 for the
following titrations: (3 marks)
a. NH3 titrated with HCI
b. Ba(OH)2 titrated with HC1
C. HF titrated with NaOH
7. In a titration, 34.8 mL of 0.115M HNO3 were required to neutralize 25mL
of solution of Ca(OH)2. What was the original concentration of the
Ca(OH)2 solution? Include the neutralization equation for full marks. (4
marks)
8. Choose the most correct indicator given: 0.1L of a 1M HCI solution is
added to a 0.1L of a 1.01M NaOH solution. (8 marks). Show your work for
full marks.
a. Bromocresol green-the solution is blue
b. Phenol red- the solution is yellow
C. Alizarin yellow-the solution is dark orange
d. Phenolphthalein- the solution is colourless


---

### Page 4

Name:
School:
9. Would it take more 0.1M HCI or 0.1M H2SO4 to neutralize 30mL of
NaOH? Explain how you know. (2 marks)
10. Consider 25.0mL of 0.100M HA (HA is a fictional acid), for which
Ka-1.00x105, titrated with 0.0500M NaOH solution. What is the initial pH
before adding any titrate? (4 marks)
11. 50.0mL of 0.185M Sr(OH)2 is reacted with 35.0mL of a solution containing
0.130g of HCI.
a. Calculate the pOH resulting from the mixture. (8 marks)
b. Suggest an indicator that will be effective for this incomplete
titration and explain your choice. (2 marks)