

---

### Page 1

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations,
and Titrations
pages 591-597 in Heath
pages 617-621 in Matter and Change
1


---

### Page 2

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
Neutralization Reactions
What happens when an acid, like HC1, is mixed with a base, like NaOH?
HClag) + NaOH(ag) *
When an acid and a base combine, water and a salt is produced; this is called a
neutralization reaction.
In general: acid + base * salt + water
A salt is an ionic compound containing a positive ion (other than H +) and a
negative ion (other than OH-).
If we wrote the above equation in ionic form we would get:
H+ (aq) + Cl(ag) + Natlag + OHag) * Na'(ag) + Cl(ag) + HO0
If we write the net ionic equation,
H'ag) + OHag) * HO0
Therefore, when a strong acid and strong base are mixed together in the
proper amounts - such that the [H*] = OH] - a neutral solution results in which
$pH= 7.$
Therefore, the acid and base have neutralized each other and the acidic
and basic properties no longer exist; these are only completely successful if one
(or both) reactant is a strong acid or strong base.
Ex) Write the neutralization for the following acid-base reactions (make sure to
balance):
a) HC1 and KOH
b) Sulfuric acid and ammonium hydroxide
c) HCO3 and sodium hydroxide
2


---

### Page 3

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
Indicators
An indicator is a substance that changes color under varying conditions of
acidity.
InHeInag + Hog
These are less precise measurements' than the pH scale because we judge
the strength of the acid or base by the color of the indicator which is open
to interpretation.
Indicators are either weak acids or bases; weak acids function in strong bases
and visa versa. They will change color when added to a solution with a specific
pHI level.
We will use thej pH Range of Common Indicators chart (Table 15) to answer
questions about the general pH of a solution.
Ex) A given solution turns methyl orange yellow, litmus blue, and
phenolphthalein pink. What is the pH range of the solution?
Ex) What color would methyl orange, litmus, and phenolphthalein turn
when testing:
$a) vinegar (pH = 3)$
b) sea water (pH - 8)
Ex) A solution gave the following test results: methyl red turned
yellow, phenol red turned red, and phenolphthalein was colorless.
Give the pH range for the solution.
**Toj find the K.for an indicator, we need to use the average pH the
indicator reacts with, and then find the antilog.
Ex) THINKING QUESTION: What is the K. of bromocresol green?
3


---

### Page 4

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
Extra Indicators:
Color at
Color at
Color at
Indicator
pH Range low end of
high end of
mid range
range
range
Metacresol
1.2-2.8,
Purple
7.3-9.0
red
yellow
purple
2.1-2.8,
Thymol Blue
red
yellow
blue
8.0-9.6
Bromocresol 5.2-6.8
yelow
light
purple
Purple
purple
2.0-3.0,
Cresol Red
orange
amber red
7.2-8.8
Malachite
11.4-13.0 green
light
colorless
Green
green
4


---

### Page 5

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
Titrations
A titration is a laboratory procedure used to determine the concentration
of acidic or basic solutions with unknown concentrations.
During an acid-base titration an acid with a known concentration (standard
solution) is slowly added to a base with an unknown concentration with a
known volume (or vice versa).
-An indicator is also added to the solution which will signal (by a change in
color) when the base has been neutralized.
Note that as soon as you see a color change the titration is complete and
the [H+] and [OH-] are proportionally equal.
At that point - called the equivalency point - the titration is stopped (end point).
Titration Method:
1. Put a measured volume of an acidic (or basic) solution of unknown
concentration in a beaker.
2. Put the pH meter into the solution. Read and record the initial pH of the
solution.
3. A buret is filled with titrating" basic (or acidic if unknown solution is basic)
solution of known concentration. This is our standard solution.
4. Measured volumes of the standard solution are slowly added and mixed into
the solution in the beaker. The pH is read and recorded after each addition.
5. Continue this process until the reaction reaches its equivalence point (a known
pH or a change in color if an indicator was used)
**strong acid + strong base: equivalence point should be very close to 7
By knowing the initial volume of the base, the volume of acid added, and the
initial concentration of the acid we can calculate the concentration of the acid or
base.
**Ifa weak acid and a strong base are titrated, the equivalence point will be >7 (excess
[OH); limited [H+])
**fa weak base and a strong acid are titrated, the equivalence point will be <7 (limited
[OHexcess [H+])
5


---

### Page 6

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
For a given balanced neutralization equation:
X acid + Y base e salt + water
our formula will be:
$YM,V.= XM,Vb$
Where:
X, Y are coefficients of the acid and base in the BALANCED chemical
equation
MMb = molarity of the acid, base
Var Vb = volume of the acid, base
Ex) During a titration 75.8 mL of a 0.100 M standard solution of HC1 is
titrated to end point with 100.0 mL of a NaOH solution with an
unknown concentration. What is the concentration of the NaOH
solution?
Ex) A 20.0 mL solution of strontium hydroxide, Sr(OH) 2 is placed in a
flask and a drop of indicator is added. The solution turns colour after
6


---

### Page 7

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
Choosing an Indicator
**The color change of the indicator selected for a specific acid-base titration
should coincide closely with the equivalence point of the titration
Ex) Choose the most correct indicator given:
## 200.0 mL of 0.125M potassium hydroxide solution is added to 100.0 mL of
0.100M nitric acid solution. Which indicator is matched with the color in the
new solution?
*remember that indicators work based on pH
a) Methyl Orange-solution is orange
b) Thymol Blue-solution is orange
c) Indigo Carmine-solution is green
d) Phenolphtalein-the solution is colorless
7


---

### Page 8

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
Resulting pH from Imperfect Titrations
When an acid and a base are mixed together, it is rare that there is gperfect ratio
between the two.
If that is the case, one of the reactants (either the acid or the base) will run
out, leaving some of the other reactant around.
If the acid is left over, the resulting solution will be slightly acidic. If the
base is left over then the solution will be slightly basic.
In order to determine the pH of the resulting solution we need to
determine which substance will run out and which will be left over.
Recall from Chem 20 that the substance that runs out is alimiting reagent and
the substance that is left over is called theexcess substance.
Once you find out which is in excess, we find out the number of moles
that should be left over after the reaction takes place and do a calculation
to determine the [H+] or [OH]. A pH calculation follows.
Ex) If you mix 50.0 mL of 0.200 M HCI and 49.9 mL of 0.200 M NaoH,
what is the resulting pH?
8


---

### Page 9

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
Ex 2) What is the resulting pH if 25.0 mL of 0.200 M Ca(OH)2 and 49.9 mL of
## 0.200 M HC1 are mixed?
9


---

### Page 10

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
## 6.6 Indicators, Neutralizations and' Titrations Assignment
1. What is the approximate pH of a solution that is:
a. yellow in methyl red, yellow in phenol red, and yellow in alizarin yellow?
b. yellow in methyl red, red in phenol red, and red in alizarin yellow?
2. Write balanced neutralization: reactions for the following:
a. the reaction between acetic acid, HC,H,O2 and potassium hydroxide,
$KOH$
b. the reaction between nitric acid, HNO3 and calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH),
3. If 25.00 mL of a 0.100 M. NaOH solution is required to neutralize 15.00 mL of a solution of
HCI, what is the molarity of the acid?
4. What is the concentration of a calcium hydroxide solution, Ca(OH),, if 30.00 mL of the base is
completely neutralized by 10.0 mL of 0.0200 M HC1?
10


---

### Page 11

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
5. What is thei molarity of a 25.01 mL solution of HCI that is titrated to an end point by 10.0: mL
of a 0.200 M solution of NaOH?
HCI(aq) +] NaOH(aq) - NaCl(aq) + H,O()
6. What is the concentration of a 50.0 mL solution of Ba(OH)2 thati is titrated to an end point
by 15.0 mL of a 0.00300 M solution of HCI?
2HCI(aq) + Ba(OH)2(aq) - BaClz(aq) + 2 HO (1)
7. What is the molarity of a 21.0 mL: nitric acid solution that completely neutralizes! 25.0 mL of
a 0.3001 M solution of NaOH?
HNO3(aq) + NaOH(aq) 1 NaNOs(aq) + H,O(I)
8. What is the concentration of a 45.0: mL: solution of KOH that is completely neutralized by
## 15.01 mL of a 0.5001 MI H2S04 solution?
H,SO4 + 21 KOH - K,SO4 + 2H,O
11


---

### Page 12

## 6.6 - Indicators, Neutralizations, and Titrations
9. A neutral solution is produced when 42.00 mL of a 0.150 M NaOH solution is used to titrate
## 50.001 mL of a sulfuric acid (H,SO4) solution. Whati is the concentration of the sulfuric acid solution
before titration?
10. 0.080 moles of solid NaOH are added to 0.1L of a 1M HCI solution. Which: reactant is in excess?
Determine the [H] and [OH] at equilibrium.
11. Calculate the pOH resulting from mixing 75.0mL of 0.200M HBr with 225.0: mL of 0.150M
KOH.
12