

---

### Page 1

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
Reduction
Electron
Oxidized
donor
donor
e
Electron
Reduced
acceptor
acceptor
Oxidation
Copyright @ 2006 Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Benjamin Cummings.
Unit 7. - Redox Reactions and Electrochemistry
## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
pages 635-642 in Matter and Change
1


---

### Page 2

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
Redox is short for oxidation and reduction,' which are two complimentary types
of chemical reactions.
Oxidation originally referred to a reaction where substances combine with
oxygen. These types of reactions are commonly called combustion or
corrosion. For example, burning a log or rusting iron.
Reduction originally referred to converting metal ores into pure metals by
reducing the mass of the ore.
These two terms have broader meanings today.
The key to all redox reactions is that there is an exchange of electrons. That is,
when one substance loses electrons, another one gains them.
For example,
Cus) + 2AgNO3lag) 1 Cu(NO3)2lag) + 2Age)
Since we have aqueous substances, the ions are dissociated.. An ionic equation
shows us
that:
Culs) + 2Ag* (aq) + 2NOsag) 1 Cu2+ (aq) + 2NOslag) + 2Ag)
Now we can remove the spectator ions and observe the net ionic equation.
Cus) + 2Ag* (ag) 1 Cu2+ (ag) + 2Ag)
2


---

### Page 3

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
Cus + 2Ag' (aq)  Cu?+ (aq) + 2Ags)
What do we see now?
1. Copper began as a neutral atom, but became an ion with a +2 charge.
An atom becomes positive by losing electrons:
Cul) * Cu2+ (aq) + 2e
Here, we say that copper has been oxidized because it has lost
electrons (the electrons appear on the product side of the equation).
2. Silver was converted from an ion with a +1 charge to a neutral atom.
Therefore, it must have gained an electron:
Ag'ag) + e e Age
We say silver has gained electrons and has been reduced (electrons
appear on the reactant side of the equation).
Now, looking back at the net ionic equation, we can see the electrons
gained by silver came. from copper.
Note that a substance can not lose electrons if there is not another
substance to take them. That is oxidation cannot occur without
reduction.
This exchange of electrons is what defines an oxidation-reduction
reaction (redox).
Here is a mnemonic:
$LEO$
$LEO$
Loss of
Electrons
is Oxidation
the Lion
$GER$
Says
Gain of
Electrons
is Reduction
$GER$
3


---

### Page 4

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
Oxidation Numbers
Since redox reactions involve exchanges of electrons between substances, there should be
an ordered system to keep track of what gains, what loses,and how many electrons are
involved. This record keeping system is called oxidation numbers.
Oxidation numbers are easiest to understand through ionic compounds because we
already know there is an exchange of electrons.
However, electronegativity can help us understand oxidation numbers in
covalent compounds. REMINDER: Electronegativity is the ability of a bonded atom to
attract electrons towards itself. (Table 6))
-metals have a relatively low electronegativity
-non-metals have a high electronegativity
When two atoms are bonded together by a covalent bond, there is a tug ofwar for the
electrons they are sharing due to differences in each atom' s electronegativity. The more
electronegative atom will pull harder
Electronegativity
05.09
26-29
1.0-14
30-36
## 3 4
(13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18)
15-13
36-39
H
He
2.1
20-24
40+
LI Be
B C N o
Ne
## 1.0 1.6
## 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Na Mg (3) (4) (5) (6) ( (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) AI SI P S CI Ar
## 0.9 1.3
## 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.5 3.0 -
K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe
NI Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
## 0.8 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.7 1.6 2.0 2.2 2.6 2.8 -
Rb Sr
Zr ND Mo Te Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te
Xe
## 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.6 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.2 1.9 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.7 2.6
Cs Ba La Hr Ta
Re Os Ir PI Au Hg TI Pb BI Po At Rn
## 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.4 1.9 2.0 2.3 2.0 2.0 2.2 -
Fr Ra Ac Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Uun Uuu Uub
Uuq
## 0.7 0.9 1.1
=
Ce Pr NG Pm Sm Eu Gd TD Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm BK cr Es Fm Md No Lr
4


---

### Page 5

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
Consider the water molecule. Oxygen has a higher electronegativity than hydrogen.
Therefore, the oxygen pulls the shared electrons closer to itself.
This close proximity of Oxygen and the electrons makes Oxygen partially negative.
Likewise, the part of the hydrogen that has lost the electron has become partially
positive, while the side closest to oxygen has become partially negative.
&* 8 & o
H o: H
We use the 8+ to show the parts of the molecule that are partially positive and the 8- to
show partially negative parts.
We can think of each H losing' an electron and the O as gaining' two electrons (even
though they are technically SHARING the electrons).
Charges given to atoms in this way are called oxidation numbers.
For water, hydrogen has an oxidation number of +1 because each has 'lost' an
electron. Oxygen has an oxidation number of -2 because it has gained' two electrons.
Ex) What are the oxidation numbers for H 20,?
8*
H
) o: H
**Helpful Hint: There are common oxidation numbers for elements listed in Table 17
5


---

### Page 6

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
We will not need to draw Lewis structures often for redox reactions. However,
knowing oxidation: numbers will be key to our understanding of how these reactions
work.
Use the oxidation number rules sheet when dealing with redox reactions (Table 19).
oxidation number of element in stable state = 0
sum of oxidation numbers for polyatomic compound is 0 unless otherwise
specified with accompanying charge
Note that oxidation numbers refer to each atom in a molecule or compound, and not
the total atoms for a given element.
Ex) What is the oxidation number of each element in:
a) SnCk
b) HI
/ Mg(NO2)2
d) MgH2
An increase in the oxidation number of an atom/ion represents oxidation.
A decrease in the oxidation number of an atom/ion represents reduction.
ex) Is Nitrogen oxidized or reduced when NH 3 --> N? How do you know?
6


---

### Page 7

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
## 7.1 Introduction to Redox Reactions Assignment
Oxidation Numbers for each Element
a. SnCl4
Sn
b. CasP2
Ca
P
C. Sno
Sn
d. Ag,S
Ag
5
e. HI
H
I
f. N2H4
N
H
g. Al2Os
Al
h. Ss
S
i. HNO2
H
N
j. O2
k. HsO+
H
1. CIOs
m. S2032-
S
n. KMnO4
K
Mn
o. (NH4)2S04
N
H
S
2. Determine the oxidation number of carbon in each of the following compounds:
a. methane, CH4
b. formaldehyde, CH20
C. carbon monoxide, CO
d. carbon dioxide, CO2
7


---

### Page 8

## 7.1 - Introduction to Redox Reactions
3. When elemental iron is made from Fe,O3 it iron oxidized or reduced?
4. Determine which of the following processes are oxidations and which are reductions:
a. Co2+ becomes Co
b. 21 becomes Ix.
C. Fe3+ becomes Fe2+
d. Sn2+ becomes Sn4+
5. Determine if each of the following changes is an oxidation, a reduction, or neither:
a. SO3- - SO,
b. Ca0- Ca
C. Cro, -Cr,0,
d. 21-1
e. IO- 1,
8