

---

### Page 1

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions Using Half Reactions
pages 650-653 in Matter and Change
Reduction
Oxidant + e * Product
(Gain of Electrons) (Oxidation Number Decreases)
Oxidation
Reductant * Product + e
(Loss of Electrons) (Oxidation Number Increases)
1


---

### Page 2

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
We can use oxidation numbers to identify which reactions are redox, which element is
gaining electrons, and which is losing electrons.
For example,
2Na + Cl2 e 2NaC1
It is useful to write in the oxidation of every element in every compound
above the element in the equation.
Remember that the balancing coefficients in the chemical equations do not affect the
oxidation numbers.
A chart is a useful way of organizing the changes in oxidation number for
each element:
Oxidized or
element Initial Ox. # Final Ox. # Change in e Reduced?
By looking at the table, we see:
i. oxidation numbers did change, SO it is a redox reaction.
ii. Na increased its oxidation number from 0 to +1. Therefore, it has lostelectrons.
(LEO)
iii.
decreased its oxidation number from 0 to -1. Therefore it has
gained electrons. (GER)
2


---

### Page 3

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
So, an increase in oxidation number indicates oxidation, while a decrease in oxidation
number indicates reduction.
Ex 1) Consider the following reaction:
2Mg + O2 * 2MgO
Summarize the changes in oxidation number for each element, determine how many
electrons has been transferred per atom, and identify what has been oxidized and what
has been reduced.
Oxidized or
element Initial Ox. # Final Ox. # Change in e Reduced?
Recall that oxidation cannot occur without reduction (and vice versa). Therefore, if one
substance cannot accept the electrons a substance is giving away, they cannot be given
away in the first place. That is, one allows for the other to occur.
We call the substance that is oxidized the reducing agent because it allows another
element to be reduced.
We call the substance that is being reduced the oxidizing agent because it allows
another element to be oxidized.
So, in our example above, since Mg was
and it is the
Likewise, O is the
because it was
Ex 2) In the chemical reaction
N2 + 3H2 * 2NH3
summarize the changes in oxidation numbers, determine the number of electrons
transferred per atom, identify what has been oxidized or reduced, and identify the
oxidizing and reducing agents.
Oxidized or
element Initial Ox. # Final Ox. # Change in e
Type of Agent?
Reduced?
**If there is no transfer of electrons, the reaction is not a REDOX reaction. Charges of
atoms will remain the same in a situation like this.
3


---

### Page 4

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
Now that we can recognize redox reactions, we need to know how to balance them.
Balancing redox reactions can be tricky; therefore, there are two different methods
we will look at: Half Reaction and Oxidation Number Methods
Oxidation and reduction always occur together. Each part of the reaction is called a
half-reaction" (Table 18 and 19)
Steps:
1. Break the reaction into two half reactions (an oxidation and a
reduction) and remove any spectator ions from the equations (or use
Table 18 and 19 to help find half reactions)
Note - oxidation numbers may help decide what is being oxidized
and what is being reduced.
2. Balance each half-reaction separately, first by number of atoms, then
by charge by adding electrons to the appropriate side of the equation.
3. Compare the: number of electrons in each equation. They must be
equal. If they arei not equal, make them equal by multiplying
everything in one half-reaction by a coefficient.
4. Add the two equations together and replace all spectator ions in the
correct spot. Electrons do not belong here (they should cancel). Furthermore,
all compounds previously broken up are written as bonded together
again.
Ex) Balance the following using the half reaction method:
Cu (s) + AgNO3 (aq) 1 Cu(NO3)2 (aq) + Ag (s)
4


---

### Page 5

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
iren nail
redox
reaction
*
Copper
Coating
-
copper sulfate
iron I So lfate
Solvtion
Solotion
Ex) Balance the following using half reactions:
Fe (s) + CuSO4lag) 1 Cu/s) + Fe2(SO4)3 (aq)
5


---

### Page 6

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
Balancing Half Reactions in Acidic Solutions
When you are told that a half reaction is in an acidic solution we need to
understand that the half reaction itself does not show all substances present.
Since a half reaction only explains how oxidation numbers change for a particular
substance, we may need to add HO (since we are in a solution) and H+ (since the
solution is acidic) to the equation.
Ex) Write the balanced equation for the half reaction in which nitric oxide (NO) is
reduced to nitrous oxide (N20) in an acidic solution.
The Steps:
1. Balance all elements for mass except for hydrogen and oxygen.
2. Add HO to one side of the reaction to balance the Oxygens first.
3. You will probably have a discrepancy with the number of hydrogens, SO add
a number of H+ to the opposite side as H,O to balance them
out.
4. Now, add electrons to one of the sides SO that each side of the reaction
is electrically the same.
This is now the balanced chemical equation for this HALF-REACTION: Note,
that since electrons are
this process is
6


---

### Page 7

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
Balancing Half Reactions in Basic Solutions
We will use a similar process, realizing this time that water and OH- must be present.
Ex) Write the balanced equation for the oxidation half reaction in which Cl2 is oxidized to
CIO3i in basic solution.
The Steps:
1. Balance all elements for mass except hydrogen and oxygen.
2. Add H,O to balance for Oxygens.
3. Add H+ to balance for hydrogens.
4. Add the same number of OH as H+ ions in previous step to both
sides of the equation.
5. Cancel off as many waters as you can (you should now have H 20 on both sides of the
equation).
6. Add in electrons to make both sides equal in charge.
This is now the balanced chemical equation for this HALF-REACTION: Note, that sinc
electrons are
has occurred in this process
7


---

### Page 8

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
## 7.2 Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions Assignment
1. For each of these reactions, determine whether or not it is a redox reaction. If any are,
identify oxidizing and reducing agents in those reactions.
a. CaBr2 + Pb(NO3)2 - PbBr2 + Ca(NO3)2
Final
e
Initial
Oxidized
element
Ox. gained
Agent
Ox. No
or reduced
No. or lost
1
-
b. P4 + 502 1 P4010
Final
e
Initial
Oxidized
element
Ox. gained
Agent
Ox. No
No. or lost or reduced
*
*
C. SnCl2 + 2 FeCl3 - 21 FeCl2 + SnCl
Final
e
Initial
Oxidized
element
Ox. gained
Agent
Ox. No
or reduced
No. or lost
*
*
8


---

### Page 9

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
2. Break each equation into two half-reactions. Identify each half-reaction as oxidation or
reduction.
a. Cu + 21 H+ - Cu?+ + H2
b. 2A1 +3S- AlS3
3. Balance the following equations using the half-reaction method. Identify what is reduced
and what is the reducing agent.
a. Na + Br2 * NaBr
b. Zn +S-2 Zns
C. Au3+ (ag) + Cde - Au (s) + Cd2leg
9


---

### Page 10

## 7.2 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Half Reactions
4. Write a balanced equation for each of the following half-reactions, and state whether it
represents oxidation or reduction.
a. HCIO, * CI
(acidic)
b. Cr(OH); - Cro,
(basic)
C. H,Ge03 - Ge
(acidic)
d. Sbo, - Sb
(basic)
5. CHALLENGE: By using balanced half-reaction equations from your tables work out overall
redox equation for the reaction below in an acidic solution.
a. Cu + NO,-Cu2+ + NO
10