

---

### Page 1

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
pages 644-649 in Matter and Change
I II
III IV V VI VII
+1
# 2
o
+2 €
## 4 3 -2 -1
# #2
## 4 S : :
-
-3 -2 -1
## 4 2 S : I : I : : #2 : 42 : : : : -
-3 -2 -1
Rb +1 4
## 41 Cd +2 # In : Sb :5 : Te
I
-2 -1


---

### Page 2

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
The second balancing method for Redox reactions is the oxidation number method. This
is very helpful for difficult equations...
For example: Cug + Ag' (aq) * Cu2+ (aq) + Ag)
appears to be balanced, but the charges are not balanced.
The total electrical charge on the reactant side must equal the total electrical charge on the produci
side.
Therefore, like mass (Conservation of Mass), charge is conserved during a chemical
reaction.
To balance the equation using oxidation numbers we will follow these steps:
1. Assign oxidation numbers to all atoms in the equation
2. Identify the atoms that are oxidized and the atoms that are reduced
3. Determine the change in the oxidation number for the atoms that are oxidized and
for the atoms that are reduced
4. Make the change in oxidation numbers equal in magnitude by adjusting the
coefficients of the equation
5. If necessary, use the conventional method (by mass) to balance the remainder of the
equation
Ex 1) Curs) + HNO3lag) -> Cu(NO3)2lag + NO2(g) + H,O0


---

### Page 3

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
Ex 2) MnO4 + Fe2+ + H+ e Mn2+ + Fe3+ + H,O
Ex 3) NH3 + O2 e NO2 + H,O


---

### Page 4

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
Note - if a polyatomic ion stays intact, the oxidation numbers of its
elements will not change.
Ex) K,Cr,07 + Nal + HSO4 e Cr2(SO4)3 + I + HO + Na,SO4 + K,SO4


---

### Page 5

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
Overall Redox In Acidic and Basic Solutions
Ex) Balance the following redox reaction in an acidic solution:
P4 + IO3 - H,PO4+ I
Method 1 - Oxidation Numbers
Now we must balance for mass. Start with Oxygen first by adding the HO molecule.
Finish off by balancing the hydrogens by adding H+.
Method 2 - Half Reactions
P4 + IO3 - H,PO4+ I
Break the reaction up into two half reactions.
1. Recall that step 1 is to balance for mass. One reaction will require you to add HO
and H+.
2. Balance for charge by adding the correct number of electrons in each half reaction.
3. Finally, get the number of electrons equal in both half reactions by multiplying by a
coefficient.
4. Add these two half reactions up to get the overall balanced redox reaction.


---

### Page 6

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
Redox reactions that are in basic solutions are similar, however we need to deal with
adding OH- as well.
Ex) Balance the equation for the reaction of the permanganate ion with the sulfite ion
in a basic solution to give manganese dioxide (Mno 2) and the sulfate ion.
Method 1 - Oxidation Numbers
In this method, we need add H,O on the opposite side to balance for
Oxygens, use H+ to balance for charge; then add the equivalent number
of OH ions to both sides.
Method 2 - Half Reactions
Note that each half reaction will contain oxygen, SO you will need to add H,O to both
equations. (Just like in 7.2) The best way to do this is to treat this reaction as if it were
in an acidic solution then neutralize the number of H + in the final equation with the
same number of OH- on both sides.


---

### Page 7

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
## 7.3 - Balancing Equations with Oxidation Numbers Assignment
1. Balance the following redox reactions using the oxidation number method.
a. SnCl2 + HgClz --> SnCl + HgCI
b. HNO3 + HS -> NO + S + H,O
C. NaCIO + H,S --> NaCl + H,SO4
d. MnO4 + H+ + - -> Mn2+ + Cl2 + H,O


---

### Page 8

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
2. Balance each of the following redox reactions in acidic solutions using both methods:
a) CIO: + Br
*
CI + BrO;
i) Oxidation Numbers:
ii) Half Reactions
a) HNO3
+ Cu
NO, + Cu2+
i) Oxidation Numbers:
ii) Half Reactions


---

### Page 9

## 7.3 - Balancing Redox Reactions with Oxidation Numbers
3. Balance the following redox reactions in basic solutions using both methods:
a) CIO3 + MnO2
* Cl + MnO4
i) Oxidation Numbers
ii) Half Reactions
b) ReO4 + IO- * IO3 + Re
i) Oxidation Numbers
ii) Half Reactions