

---

### Page 1

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
pages 633-642 in Heath
C
0
Salt
Bridge
Zn
$CI_4$
$CU$
Zn2+
cu2+ 1
- Anode
Cathode 1
Zn
2e- + Zn2+
Cu2++ 2e- Cu
1


---

### Page 2

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
During a redox reaction, electrons are passed from one substance to another.
We call the flow of electrons electric current. This current can be harnessed to do
work.
Electrochemistry is the branch of chemistry that deals with the conversion between
chemical and electrical energy.
An electrochemical cell is the basic unit of a battery. It converts energy from a
spontaneous redox reaction into electricity (from the flow of electrons through a metal
or ion movement in a solution).
This transformation from chemical energy to electricity will happen as the
electrons are passed to from one substance to another in a redox reaction.
For example, an electrochemical cell can be made by using the following reaction:
Zn) + Cu?+ (aq) 1 Zn2+ (aq) + Cus)
This reaction involves the two half reactions:
Zns) 1 Zn?+ (ag) + 2e
and
Cu?+ (aq) + 2e- Cus)
oxidation
reduction
To create electricity, we must have our electrons pass through an external circuit. If
we simply placed Zn in Cu 2+ ions a reaction would occur, but electricity would not be
created.
Zinc rod
Zinc rod is eaten away
Cuso4 solution
Precipitation
of copper
2


---

### Page 3

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
Here is how an electrochemical cell can be created with this reaction:
1. We need two beakers containing electrolytic solutions. One beaker will contain Zn
(NO3)2 and the other will contain Cu(NO 3)2- Zn metal will be placed in the first beaker
while Cu metal will be in the second (these are called the electrodes; electrically
conducting solids which are placed in contact with electrolyte solutions ).
Zn metal
Cur metal
Zi?*
cu?*
NO;
$NO_3$
Zn(NO3)2
Cu(NO,)2
Since the electrons cannot move between the substances yet our
redox reaction cannot occur yet. Therefore each beaker contains half
a cell.
2. The two half cells must be connected in two ways.
First we must connect our electrodes with wire. Connected to the wire should be a
voltmeter (a device that detects electric current). This is known as the external circuit.
Second we add a salt bridge, which is a U-shaped tube that also contains an electrolytic
solution (KNO3 in this case). This solution will allow electrons to flow freely between the
two beakers. This is known as the internal circuit.
external
voltmeter
circuit
- O
Zn
salt bridge
Cu
electrode
electrode
$KNO_3$
internal
circuit
2+
Zn
cu?
$NO_3$
$NO_3$
Zn(s)-Zn 2+ (aq) + 2e
Cu?(aq) + 2e 1 Cu(s)
Anode
oxidation
Cathode reduction
3


---

### Page 4

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
3. In the Zn half cell, the Zn electrode will disintegrate which forms Zn 2+ ions and
releases electrons. Therefore oxidation occurs here.
The half cell that undergoes oxidation is called the anode. This is the producer of
electrons making it the negative post.
A mnemonic:
An Ox' Anode = Oxidation
Conversely, the Cu half of the cell the Cu electrode gets Cu deposited on it. This
requires electrons. Therefore, reduction is happening here.
The half cell that undergoes reduction is called the cathode. This is the positive
post of the cell as it consumes electrons.
A mnemonic:
-
'red cat' reduction = cathode
4


---

### Page 5

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
The external circuit is where all the electrical work is done as the electrons flow
from the anode to the cathode.
The internal circuit is used to keep each half cell electrically neutral.
post
post
Zn
Cu
electrode NO
electrode
Zn
cu?

Zn(s)- - Zn (aq) 2e cu?(aq) + 2e: 1 Cu(s)
Anode oxidation Cathode reduction
If the anode's half cell is producing Zn 2+ then it will attract the NO3 from the salt
bridge.
Likewise, if Cu2+ is leaving the anode's solution then it will attract the K+ from the
bridge.
Therefore, electrons flow from the anode to the cathode.
Anions flow to the anode side of the cell.
Cations flow to the cathode side of the cell.
At this point, the cell is complete and electrons can flow allowing the redox
reaction to proceed.
When the mass of each electrode is measured before and after the reaction, it is
found to be different. The copper electrode will have a greater mass after the
experiment and the zinc electrode will have less mass.
5


---

### Page 6

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
Standard Electrode Potentials
Why was Zn oxidized and Cu reduced in the hypothetical electrochemical cell we
made last section? The answer is due to valence electrons.
Metals, in the first place, only have a few valence electrons which
means they like to get rid of them (become oxidized).
However, metals differ in how easily they can lose their electrons. A
list of how easily a metal can lose its electrons is known as the activity series. The higher
the metal is on the chart, the more likely it is to lose electrons (become oxidized).
Table 20
Metal Activity Series
Metal
Metal Ion
Reactivity
Lithium
Lit
Most Reactive
Potassium
K+
Calcium
Ca2+
Sodium
Na+
Magnesium
Mg2+
Aluminum
AI3+
Manganese
Mn2+
Zinc
Zn2+
Chromium
Cr2+, Cr3+
Iron
Fe2+, Fe3+
Lead
Pb2+
Copper
Cu2+
Mercury
Hg2+
Silver
Ag+
Platinum
Pt2+
Gold
Aut, Au3+
Leastl Reactive
This difference in ability to lose electrons is what drives electrochemical cells and it is
the force that allows electrons to flow from the anode to the cathode.
This force is known as potential difference or electromotive force (emf or E).
Potential difference is measured in volts (V) and will be referred to as voltage. This is a
measure of the tendency of electrons to flow through the external circuit.
The higher the voltage the greater the tendency for electrons to flow from the anode
to the cathode. That is, more current is produced with a higher voltage.
6


---

### Page 7

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
Calculating Voltages
The voltage for electrochemical cells can be found using a standard electrode
potential for half reaction table (Table 18 and 19). Note that the table may have more
than one half reaction for a given element. Therefore, pay close attention to the specific
ion listed.
The standard reduction potential of a half-cell is a measure of the tendency to GAIN
electrons; higher number = greater oxidizing agent.
Chemists have decided to use the hydrogen half-cell as the standard to which all
other half-cell potentials will be compared. The hydrogen half-cell potential is written
as Eo = 0.00V (Eo= 1 M solutions are standard temp and pressure)
The table shows the voltage for a number of half reactions. Notice that the half
reactions listed are all reduction reactions.
If we know the substances of two half cells we can use the table to
determine which will be the anode (oxidation) and which will be the
cathode (reduction). You will need to change the sign of the given E o value for the
oxidation reaction.
When we know this, we can calculate the voltage of the electrochemical cell adn
determine if the reaction is spontaneous.
**If the total Eo is positive, your redox reaction is spontaneous in the forward
direction.
**If the total Eo is negative, your redox reaction is spontaneous in the reverse
direction.
Ex: An electrochemical cell is produced from the following two half-cells: (Pb2+ - Pb
(s)) and (Al)/A13+)
a. Determine Eo
b. Identify the anode and the cathode
C. State whether the forward reaction will be spontaneous.
7


---

### Page 8

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
Steps to calculate voltage:
1. Write down the half reactions.
2. Determine which is the anode and which is the cathode. The
reaction with the largest voltage will be the cathode since it will be
reduced. Write down the voltage associated with the cathode.
3. Write down the voltage associated with the anode. We will need to
switch the sign on this value as it is being oxidized instead of
reduced.
4. Get the same number of electrons in each half reaction and add the
two half reactions together. This allows us to cancel out our
electrons and find the overall full redox reaction and the voltage.
Ex) Calculate the voltage for the following electrochemical cells and label
the following items on the diagrams for each:
i) A cathode and the substance it is made of
ii) An anode and the substance it is made of
iii) The correct half reaction under each beaker
iv) The ions coming off or attaching to each electrode
v) The direction of the ions in the salt bridge
vi) The direction of the flow of electrons
a) copper-copper(!) and zinc-zinc(II) half cell.
0-
$KNO_3$
b) (AI I A13+) and (PbIPb2+)
$KNO_3$
8


---

### Page 9

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
## 7.4 Electrochemistry Worksheet
1. Calculate the voltage produced for each of the electrochemical cells containing the
substances below. On each diagram, label:
i. A cathode and the substance it is made of
ii. An anode and the substance it is made of
iii. The correct half reaction under each beaker
iv. The ions coming off or attaching to each electrode
- V. The direction of the ions in the salt bridge
vi. The direction of the flow of electrons
a) (Fe/Fe2+) and (Pb Pb2+)
o
e
$KNO_3$
b) (CrICra+) and (LiLi*)
0-
$KNO_3$
9


---

### Page 10

## 7.4 - Introduction to Electrochemistry and Calculating Voltages
2. Determine the Eo for a (Ag I - Ag*) and (Zn Zn2+) electrochemical cell
3. Determine Eo for a Fels) I Fe2+ (aq) - |Cug/CuPteg)
4.a) Ane electrochemical celli is created usings gold and magnesium! half-cells. Write the redox reaction. Determine which
half-cell will undergo oxidation and which will undergo reduction, identify which
substance is the anode and cathode, and calculate the voltage for the cell. You do not
need to draw a diagram of the cell.
b. If the mass of the magnesium electrode changes by 5.0 & what will be the
change in mass of the gold electrode, and will its mass increase or decrease? (hint -1 use
mole to mole stoichiometry using the redox equation found in part a)
10