

---

### Page 1

## 7.5 - Electrolysis
## 7.5 - Electrolysis
Electrolysis and electrolytic cells make up the second branch of electrochemistry.
We can think of these two things as opposite of electrochemical cells.
Electrolytic cells convert electrical energy into chemical energy (the electricity is
needed to cause a non spontaneous reaction to occur)
The Eo value is negative instead of positive.
Electrolysis of Molten NaC1
Electrolysis can be used to break up ionic compounds into its component elements.
For example,
2NaClag) * 2Nas) + Clz()
Note that this is a redox reaction. Therefore, the two half reactions can be used to find
the total voltage:
Eo
reduction 2Na* (aq) + 2e 1 Na) -2.71 V
oxidation Clag) * Clg+2e -1.36 V
net voltage required - 4.07 V
This negative voltage tells us that the overall reaction will not be spontaneous and it
will take 4.07 V to cause the reaction to occur.


---

### Page 2

## 7.5 - Electrolysis
Some key differences between electrolytic and electrochemical set-ups:
1. There is no salt bridge separating the two half reactions.
2. A source of current is needed.
3. The anode is positively charged and the cathode is negatively charged, but the anode
is still the site of oxidation and the cathode is still the site of reduction.
Here is a diagram, with explanations, of an electrolytic cell.
1. Electrons are 'produced" in the battery at the anode, the site of oxidation.
2. The electrons leave the electrochemical cell through the external circuit.
3. These negative electrons create a negative electrode in the electrolytic cell which
attracts the positive Na + ions in the electrolyte. Na + ions combine with the free electrons
and become reduced (2Na+ + 2e- 1 Na)
4. Meanwhile the negative C1 - become attracted to the positive electrode of the
electrolytic cell. At this electrode chlorine is oxidized, releasing electrons (C1- Cl+2e
5. These electrons travel through the external circuit, returning to the electrochemical
cell.
Electrochemical Cell
anode
+
cathode
oxidation
reduction
post
+ post
cathode
anode
reduction
oxidation
-post
+ post
Na* + e -> Na 3)
4)
2Ci->Cl,+2e
molten NaCI (1) -
2Na'0)+2CI
Electrolytic Cell
NaCI (I) -> 2 Na(l) + CI,(9)


---

### Page 3

## 7.5 - Electrolysis
Electroplating
Mps.hwawpounbecomhatin-FnNbV7B/nko
In electroplating, we will see that the cathodes not only just carry a charge, but they
actively participate in the reaction.
Electroplating is when a thin layer of a desired metal is used to coat (or plate) another
object. The purpose is to protect against corrosion or improve appearance.
For example, forks made from inexpensive metal are often coated with silver.
The requirements for electroplating:
1. An electrolytic solution which contains ions of the plating metal. AgNO; will
produce sufficient Ag* ions.
2. A source of current (a battery).
3. Two electrodes. The first is the object we are plating (the fork), while the second
must be the plating metal (silver).
Here are the half reactions:
Ag* + e * Ag cathode reduction
Ag * Ag* + e anode
oxidation
Note -1 there is only one metal involved.
The Ag* that will be deposited on the fork as pure silver once it undergoes reduction
will come from the electrolytic solution.
This causes the solution to become negatively charged because there is now more. NO3
present than Ag The silver bar then undergoes oxidation and replaces the Ag + that has
been removed.
The flow of electrons goes from the anode of the battery, through the external circuit,
and into the cathode of the electrolytic cell.
Electrons are produced by the oxidation of silver in the anode. These flow up through
the external circuit into the cathode of the battery.
currents source
Ag
Ag
Ag NO3
Ag(s) -> Ag
Ag > Ag(s)


---

### Page 4

## 7.5 - Electrolysis
Ex 1) First, determine the cell reaction for the electrolysis of Nal(aq) using inert
electrodes. Then, calculate the minimum voltage that must be applied in order for this
reaction to occur.
Ex 2) An iron nail is suspended in a solution of CusO 4 (aq) by an inert platinum wire. An
external power source if connected SO the nail becomes the cathode and a copper
electrode becomes the anode. If sufficient voltage is applied, what anode and cathode
half-reactions occur in this cell?


---

### Page 5

## 7.5 - Electrolysis
## 7.5 Electrolysis Assignment
1. What is the difference between an anode and a cathode in a electrolytic VS. an electrochemical
cell?
2. Predict the anode and cathode half reactions during the electrolysis of a 1.0M solution of Klag
Assume that inert electrodes are used.
3. Draw a labelled diagram of an apparatus that would plate a nickel-plated knife with silver.


---

### Page 6

## 7.5 - Electrolysis
4. Will silver metal in a solution of chloride ions produce silver ions and chlorine gas? Explain.
5. Can a 1M solution of iron (III) sulfate be stored in a container of nickel metal? Explain.
6. How many grams of hydrogen gas would be produced from the oxidation of 5.00g of magnesium
metal?